                                           PMT




Mark Scheme (Results)


November 2023



Pearson Edexcel GCSE
In English Language (1EN0)
Paper 1: Fiction and Imaginative Writing




                     1
                                                                                                 PMT




Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications

Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body.
We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational
and specific programmes for employers. For further information visit our qualifications
websites at www.edexcel.com or www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with
us using the details on our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus.




Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere

Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone
progress in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds
of people, wherever they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150
years, and by working across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an
international reputation for our commitment to high standards and raising achievement
through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can help you and your
students at: www.pearson.com/uk




November 2023
Question Paper Log Number P72016
Publications Code 1EN0_01_MS_2311
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2023


                                              2
                                                                                      PMT




  General Marking Guidance

  •   All candidates must receive the same treatment. Examiners must mark the
      last candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the first.
  •   Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be rewarded
      for what they have shown they can do rather than penalised for omissions.
  •   Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme - not according to
      their perception of where the grade boundaries may lie.
  •   All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. Examiners
      should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer matches the
      mark scheme. Examiners should also be prepared to award zero marks if
      the candidate’s response is not worthy of credit according to the mark
      scheme.
  •   Where some judgement is required, mark schemes will provide the
      principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification/indicative
      content will not be exhaustive.
  •   When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the mark
      scheme to a candidate’s response, a senior examiner must be consulted
      before a mark is given.
  •   Crossed out work should be marked unless the candidate has replaced it
      with an alternative response.


Specific Marking Guidance

When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners should consult both the
indicative content and the associated marking grid(s). When using a levels-based
mark scheme, the ‘best fit’ approach should be used.
    • Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the
        answer and place it in that level.
   •    The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality of
        the answer and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points
        are displayed at that level.
  •    Indicative content is exactly that – they are factual points that candidates
       are likely to use to construct their answer.
  •    It is possible for an answer to be constructed without mentioning some or
       all of these points, as long as they provide alternative responses to the
       indicative content that fulfils the requirements of the question. It is the
       examiner’s responsibility to apply their professional judgement to the
       candidate’s response in determining if the answer fulfils the requirements
       of the question.




                                            3
                                                                                      PMT




Placing a mark within a level

  •   Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the
      answer and place it in that level. The mark awarded within the level will be
      decided based on the quality of the answer and will be modified according
      to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that level.
  •   In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply.
      Candidates will be placed in the level that best describes their answer
      according to the descriptors in that level. Marks will be awarded towards
      the top or bottom of that level depending on how they have evidenced
      each of the descriptor bullet points.
  •   If the candidate’s answer meets the requirements fully, markers should
      be prepared to award full marks within the level. The top mark in the level
      is used for work that is as good as can realistically be expected within that
      level.




                                           4
                                                                                      PMT




                               Section A: Reading


Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit                   Mark
Number     information and ideas
1          Accept the following from lines 1‒2:                                (1)

               •   afternoon
               •   (as the) day declined



Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit                   Mark
Number     information and ideas
2          Accept any reasonable answer based on the given lines, up           (2)
           to a maximum of 2 marks.

                It led me across a barren* slope divided by stone fences,
           with here and there a group of shattered sheds, a tall
           chimney, and a blackened cinder-mound, marking the site of
           a deserted mine. A light fog, meanwhile, was creeping up
           from the east, and the dusk was gathering fast.
                Now, to lose one's way in such a place and at such an
           hour would be disagreeable enough, and the footpath ‒ a
           trodden track already half obliterated ‒ would be
           indistinguishable in the course of another ten minutes.
           Looking anxiously ahead, therefore, in the hope of seeing
           some sign of habitation**, I hastened on, scaling one stone
           stile after another, till I all at once found myself going around
           the edge of a line of fences. Following these, with bare
           boughs branching out overhead and dead leaves rustling
           underfoot, I came presently to a point where the path
           divided.

           Quotations and candidate’s own words are
           acceptable.

           For example:
           •   the slope is ‘barren’, it is devoid of life
           •   there are no workers
           •   the sheds are broken down and ‘shattered’
           •   the mines are ‘deserted’
           •   there are no proper footpaths
           •   the footpaths that do exist are ‘already half obliterated’
           •   it will soon be ‘indistinguishable’
           •   there are no houses nearby and he hopes to spot some
               signs of life
           •   the paths are not well used as there are ‘dead leaves
               underfoot’.




                                       5
                                                                                                   PMT




   In responses to the following question, examiners should be aware of the
   different ways candidates may structure their responses. There should be
   sufficient evidence analysing both language and structure to reward responses.
   Responses that are unbalanced cannot access Level 2 or above, where
   analysis of both language and structure is required.
Question Indicative content
Number
3         Reward responses that explain how the writer uses language and structure to
          describe the thoughts and feelings of the narrator as he approaches and meets
          the man in the given lines.

          Responses may include the following points about the language of the text:
          • use of metaphor, ‘to be lost in hesitation’, revealing his anxieties about literally
             becoming lost
          • use of the language of time shows the narrator’s urgency: ‘no time to be lost
             in hesitation’, ‘As soon as’
          • an adjectival phrase is used to indicate how thick the fog was: ‘a fleecy bank of
             fog’
          • use of an idiomatic phrase, ‘not met a living soul’, is a telling phrase
             suggesting that the narrator is perhaps thinking of ghosts
          • opposing adverbs emphasise the narrator’s worry and sense of haste, ‘I
             advancing rapidly; he slowly ‒’
          • adjectives are used to emphasise the atmosphere, ‘dark’ and ‘misty’
          • repetition of intensifiers shows just how little he could see: ‘so dark and so
             misty’
          • direct speech creates the impression of normality: ‘‘Can you tell me’, I said, ‘if
             I am right for Pit End, and how far I have to go’’
          • a powerful, polysyllabic adjective ends this section, ‘bewildered’, indicating that
             the writer is not just confused, but also hinting at its original meaning, to be
             ‘led astray or lured into the wilds’.
          •
          Responses may include the following points about the structure of the text:
          • this extract opens and ends with a question, structured from the uncertainty of
             which path to take, to relief at the sighting of the man and finally to
             consternation at his behaviour and disappearance
          • this section opens with a question, ‘Which should I take?’, standing as a one-
             line paragraph, revealing his deep uncertainty
          • there is use of sentence variety: the opening question is followed by a complex
             sentence, describing the path he has followed
          • there is repetition of the weather, ‘bank of fog’, ‘emerging from the fog’,
             which emphasises the lack of visibility and is used to draw out the moment of
             their meeting and to heighten the narrator’s feelings of suspense
          • there is use of ellipsis to show his shock as he realises that this is no ordinary
             man: ‘'but will this path take me to Pit End, and if so' …’’
          • the effect of the multi-clausal sentence beginning, ‘He had passed on without
             pausing’, its semi-colons and exclamation mark, all accentuate the sense of
             shock. This sentence uses a triadic structure which has the effect of building to
             a climax
          • hyphens and commas are used to indicate the narrator’s hesitancy, as he
             questions the evidence of his own senses: ‘I stopped, with the words on my
             lips; then turned to look after ‒ perhaps, to follow – him’.
                                                                                  (6 marks)


                                            6
                                                                                   PMT




Level     Mark   AO2: Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use
                 language and structure to achieve effects and influence
                 readers, using relevant subject terminology to support
                 their views.
          0      No rewardable material.

Level 1   1–2    •  Comment on the language and/or structure used to
                    achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                    vocabulary.
                 • The selection of references is valid, but not developed.
                 NB: The mark awarded cannot progress beyond the top
                 of Level 1 if only language OR structure has been
                 considered.

Level 2   3–4    •   Explanation of how both language and structure are used
                     to achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                     vocabulary and sentence structure.
                 •   The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to
                     the points being made.

Level 3   5–6    •   Analysis of how both language and structure are used to
                     achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                     vocabulary, sentence structure and other language
                     features.
                 •   The selection of references is discriminating and clarifies
                     the points being made.




                                  7
                                                                                                   PMT




Question   Indicative content
Number

4          Reward responses that evaluate how successfully the attempt to create an
           atmosphere of confusion is achieved.

           References to the writer’s techniques should only be credited at Level 2
           and above if they support the critical judgement of the text.

           Responses may include:

           •   the opening of the passage creates an atmosphere of gloom and doubt for the
               reader with the dying of the light and the narrator’s confusion about where he
               is and how long the journey will take
           •   the laconic and unhelpful response by the driver, who ‘turned a straw in his
               mouth and grunted’, does not inspire confidence in the narrator or the reader
           •   as the narrator sets off walking, the imagery is one of looming decay and
               deterioration, from the ‘little road-side ruin’, through the ‘shattered sheds’ to
               the ‘deserted mine’
           •   the fog is personified as a sinister force, ‘creeping up’ on the narrator, and
               causing uncertainty by deliberately obscuring his view of the way ahead
           •   the writer juxtaposes the narrator’s disorientation at losing his way, in
               unfamiliar territory and at such a late hour with the ‘hope’ of seeing some
               signs of life
           •   the reader’s concern for the narrator is highlighted by the single question
               paragraph which articulates pure uncertainty. This is compounded when we
               realise that he has chosen a path, the end of which is hidden in the fog
           •   the extent of the growing darkness is brought home by just how close the
               narrator is to the other man, ‘within half a dozen yards’, before he can
               distinguish what he is wearing
           •   the dark clothing of the mysterious man symbolises the narrator’s lack of
               knowledge, and some may see it as representing the forces of evil and the
               supernatural
           •   there is an ironic reversal in that the narrator’s fear throughout has been one
               of obscurity and not being able to see clearly, yet now it is he who is eerily
               invisible to the eyes of the other man
           •   this confusion is emphasised by the use of the only exclamation mark in the
               entire passage: ‘He had passed on without pausing; without looking at me; I
               could almost have believed, without seeing me!’
           •   the narrator’s doubt and confusion are emphasised by the multi-clausal
               sentence and the use of the adverb ‘perhaps’ to show that he is even uncertain
               about his own actions
           •   even the boy he sees is not one thing or another, emphasised through
               repetition: ‘half-running, half-walking’
           •   ‘the gloom’ in the penultimate line is literal and metaphorical
           •   the level of confusion reaches a crescendo with four questions in the
               penultimate paragraph and the final, single-line paragraph in which the
               narrator even doubts the evidence of his own senses: ‘Was I dreaming?’

                                                                                    (15 marks)



                                             8
                                                                           PMT




Level     Mark    AO4: Evaluate texts critically and support this with
                  appropriate textual references
          0       No rewardable material.

Level 1   1–3     •   Description of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  •   Limited assertions are offered about the text.
                  •   The use of references is limited.

Level 2   4–6     •   Comment on ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  •   Straightforward opinions with limited
                      judgements are offered about the text.
                  •   The selection of references is valid, but not
                      developed.

Level 3   7–9     •   Explanation of ideas, events, themes or
                      settings.
                  •   Informed judgement is offered about the text.
                  •   The selection of references is appropriate and
                      relevant to the points being made.

Level 4   10–12   •   Analysis of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  •   Well-informed and developed critical judgement
                      is offered about the text.
                  •   The selection of references is appropriate,
                      detailed and fully supports the points being
                      made.

Level 5   13–15   •   Evaluation of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  •   There is a sustained and detached critical
                      overview and judgement about the text.
                  •   The selection of references is apt and
                      discriminating and is persuasive in clarifying the
                      points being made.




                                      9
                                                                                      PMT




                     Section B: Imaginative Writing

 Refer to the writing assessment grids at the end of this section when
                  marking Question 5 and Question 6.

Question   Indicative content
Number
*5         Purpose: to write a real or imagined piece about a time when
           something mysterious happened. This may involve a range of
           approaches, including: description, anecdote, speech, narrative and
           literary techniques.

           Audience: the writing is for a general readership. Candidates can
           choose to write for an adult audience or an audience of young people.

           Form: the response may be narrative, descriptive or monologue.
           There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
           development of points and a conclusion. Some candidates may
           intentionally adapt their language and style to their audience by using,
           for example, a more informal or colloquial approach. Candidates may
           introduce some literary elements.

           Responses may:
             • use the passage to inspire writing; for example, some may
                attempt to write a ghost story in the style of this passage
             • write about dream-like or real-life situations where something
                unexpected happened, possibly at home or at school
             • some may borrow from science fiction, fantasy or detective
                fiction to create their writing
             • use appropriate techniques for creative writing: vocabulary,
                imagery, language techniques
             • use a voice that attempts to make the piece interesting and
                believable for the chosen audience, despite the clear elements of
                unreality
             • demonstrate particular understanding of the form used
             • be written in a register and style appropriate for the chosen
                form, which may include colloquial elements, dialogue within
                description or narrative, or a sustained single voice in a
                monologue.

                                                                        (40 marks)

           (includes 16 marks for the range of vocabulary and sentence
           structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate use of
           spelling and punctuation)




                                     10
                                                                                      PMT




Question   Indicative content
Number
*6         Purpose: to write a real or imagined piece about a meeting with
           someone who was special or memorable in some way. This may
           involve a range of approaches, including: description, anecdote,
           speech, narrative and literary techniques.

           Audience: the writing is for a general readership. Candidates can
           choose to write for an adult audience or an audience of young people.

           Form: the response may be narrative, descriptive or a monologue.
           There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
           development of points and a conclusion. Some candidates may
           intentionally adapt their language and style to their audience by using,
           for example, a more informal or colloquial approach. Candidates may
           introduce some literary elements.

           Responses may:
             • use the images to inspire writing; for example, some may
                choose to write about heroes or inspirational figures, others may
                reflect on those who have been memorable in some way
             • write about family members that have had a great influence
             • describe an incident involving the memorable character
             • write about more than a single person
             • use appropriate techniques for creative writing: vocabulary,
                imagery, language techniques
             • use a voice that attempts to make the piece interesting and
                believable to the chosen audience
             • demonstrate particular understanding of the form used
             • be written in a register and style appropriate for the chosen
                form, which may include colloquial elements, dialogue within
                description or narrative, or a sustained single voice in a
                monologue.

                                                                       (40 marks)

           (includes 16 marks for the range of vocabulary and sentence
           structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate use of
           spelling and punctuation)




                                     11
                                                                                   PMT




          Writing assessment grids for Question 5 and Question 6

AO5:
• Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and
  adapting tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and
  audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical
  features to support coherence and cohesion of texts.

Level      Mark   The candidate:
          0       • provides no rewardable material

Level 1   1–4     • offers a basic response, with audience and/or purpose not
                    fully established
                  • expresses information and ideas, with limited use of
                    structural and grammatical features


Level 2   5–9     • shows an awareness of audience and purpose, with
                    straightforward use of tone, style and register
                  • expresses and orders information and ideas; uses
                    paragraphs and a range of structural and grammatical
                    features

Level 3   10–14   • selects material and stylistic or rhetorical devices to suit
                    audience and purpose, with appropriate use of tone, style
                    and register
                  • develops and connects appropriate information and ideas;
                    structural and grammatical features and paragraphing
                    make meaning clear

Level 4   15–19   • organises material for particular effect, with effective use
                    of tone, style and register
                  • manages information and ideas, with structural and
                    grammatical features used cohesively and deliberately
                    across the text


Level 5   20–24   • shapes audience response with subtlety, with
                    sophisticated and sustained use of tone, style and register
                  • manipulates complex ideas, utilising a range of structural
                    and grammatical features to support coherence and
                    cohesion.




                                      12
                                                                                            PMT




 AO6:

 Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
 clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation


 Level           Mark       The candidate:
               0             • provides no rewardable material

 Level 1       1–3           • uses basic vocabulary, often misspelled
                             • uses punctuation with basic control, creating undeveloped,
                               often repetitive, sentence structures


 Level 2       4–6           • writes with a range of correctly spelt vocabulary, e.g.
                               words with regular patterns such as prefixes, suffixes,
                               double consonants
                             • uses punctuation with control, creating a range of
                               sentence structures, including coordination and
                               subordination

 Level 3       7–9           • uses a varied vocabulary and spells words containing
                               irregular patterns correctly
                             • uses accurate and varied punctuation, adapting sentence
                               structure to contribute positively to purpose and effect


 Level 4       10–12         • uses a wide, selective vocabulary with only occasional
                               spelling errors
                             • positions a range of punctuation for clarity, managing
                               sentence structures for deliberate effect


 Level 5       13–16         • uses an extensive vocabulary strategically; rare spelling
                               errors do not detract from overall meaning
                             • punctuates writing with accuracy to aid emphasis and
                               precision, using a range of sentence structures accurately
                               and selectively to achieve particular effects.




Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom


                                                         13
