                                                 PMT




Mark Scheme (Results)
Summer 2022


Pearson Edexcel GCSE in English
Language (1EN0)
Paper 2: Non-fiction and Transactional Writing
                                                                                                            PMT




Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications



Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body. We provide
a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes
for employers. For further information visit our qualifications websites at www.edexcel.com or
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page
at www.edexcel.com/contactus




Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere



Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim is to help everyone progress
in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever
they are in the world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, and by working across
70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international reputation for our commitment to high
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more about how we
can help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk




Summer 2022
Question Paper Log Number 66343
Publications Code 1EN0_02_MS_2206
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2022



                                                                                                  2
                                                                                               PMT




General marking guidance

•    All candidates must receive the same treatment. Examiners must mark the last
     candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the first.
•    Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be rewarded for what
     they have shown they can do rather than be penalised for omissions.
•    Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme – not according to their
     perception of where the grade boundaries may lie.
•    All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. Examiners should
     always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer matches the mark scheme.
     Examiners should also be prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response
     is not worthy of credit according to the mark scheme.
•    Where some judgment is required, mark schemes will provide the principles by which
     marks will be awarded and exemplification/indicative content will not be exhaustive.
•    When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the mark scheme to a
     candidate’s response, a senior examiner must be consulted before a mark is given.
•    Crossed-out work should be marked unless the candidate has replaced it with an
     alternative response.

Marking guidance – specific

•    The marking grids have been designed to assess student work holistically. The grids
     identify the Assessment Objective being targeted by the level descriptors.
•    When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners should consult both the
     indicative content and the associated marking grid(s). When using a levels-based
     mark scheme, the ‘best fit’ approach should be used.
•    Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the answer and
     place it in that level.
•    The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality of the answer
     and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that
     level.
•    In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply. Candidates will be
     placed in the level that best describes their answer according to the Assessment
     Objective described in the level. Marks will be awarded towards the top or bottom of
     that level depending on how they have evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points.
•    Indicative content is exactly that – it consists of factual points that candidates are
     likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed
     without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as they provide alternative
     responses to the indicative content that fulfil the requirements of the question. It is
     the examiner’s responsibility to apply their professional judgment to the candidate’s
     response in determining if the answer fulfils the requirements of the question.

    Placing a mark within a level

•    Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the answer and
     place it in that level. The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the
     quality of the answer and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points
     are displayed at that level.
•    In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply. Candidates will be

                                                                                           3
                                                                                                 PMT




     placed in the level that best describes their answer according to the descriptors in that
     level. Marks will be awarded towards the top or bottom of that level depending on how
     they have evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points.
•   If the candidate’s answer meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared
    to award full marks within the level. The top mark in the level is used for work that is
    as good as can realistically be expected within that level.




                                                                                            4
                                                                                         PMT




                               Paper 2 Mark Scheme

The table below shows the number of raw marks allocated for each question in this mark
scheme.



                         Assessment Objectives                           Total marks

Component          AO1       AO2      AO3        AO4     AO5     AO6

Component 2 –
Non-fiction and
Transactional
Writing

Question 1           2                                                         2

Question 2           2                                                         2

Question 3                     15                                              15

Question 4           1                                                         1

Question 5           1                                                         1

Question 6                                        15                           15

Question 7a          6                                                         6

Question 7b                             14                                     14

Question 8 or 9                                           24      16           40




                                                                                     5
                                                                                             PMT




                                 Section A: Reading

Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information          Mark
Number     and ideas
1          Accept any two of the following answers, based on lines 1-3:           (2)

           It was a simple accident but a costly one. As I towed my sledge
           across the glacier, the vehicle suddenly slewed* around, wedging
           my foot in a crack in the ice. As I went down, I heard the ligaments
           in my knee snap and thought simply, “This time you’ve had it.”

           •   (a simple) accident (1)
           •   (the) vehicle (suddenly) slewed (around) (1)
           •   wedging my foot (in a crack in the ice) (1)
           •   I went down (1)
           •   I heard the ligaments in my knee snap (1)
           •   I thought simply “This time you’ve had it” (1)


Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information          Mark
Number     and ideas
2          Accept any reasonable answer, based on lines 7-11.                     (2)

           As I sat motionless, the pain and an icy polar wind closed
           in on me like a pack of wolves around an injured animal.
           For perhaps the first time in my life I was truly
           frightened, and fear acted like a shot of adrenaline.
           Despite the searing** pain, I forced myself to stand and
           discovered that the knee would hold me. Leaning into my
           waist harness, I inched slowly forward against the
           massive weight of the sledge.

           Quotations and candidate's own words are acceptable.

           For example:
           • he cannot move (1)
           • ‘the pain’ (1)
           • 'an icy polar wind closed in on me' / cold (1)
           • he feels like he is an injured animal being hunted (1)
           • ‘truly frightened’ (1)
           • adrenaline helps him stand up (1)
           • ‘discovered that the knee would hold me’ (1)




                                                                                         6
                                                                                                  PMT




In responses to the question, examiners should be aware of the different ways
candidates may structure their responses. There should be sufficient evidence analysing
both language and structure to reward responses. Responses that are unbalanced
cannot access Level 3 or above, where analysis of both language and structure
is required.
Question Indicative content
Number
3         Reward responses that analyse how the text uses language and structure to
          interest and engage the reader.

          Responses may include the following points about the language of the text:

          • the opening description of a ‘simple accident’ creates a sense of tension
            which is continued throughout the extract
          • emotive adverbs are used to show the strength of feeling the writer has:
            ‘costly’, ‘truly’, ‘completely’, ‘Fortunately’, ‘terribly’
          • adverbs are also used to show the pace of events: ‘suddenly’, ‘slowly’
          • the writer uses verbs that show difficulty of movement and action, creating
            the sense of a difficult expedition: ‘wedging’, ‘forced’, ‘inched’, ‘plod’, ‘drag’,
            ‘suffering’, ‘immobilise’
          • the writer uses some colloquial phrases to create an almost conversational
            tone: ‘As I went down’, ‘‘‘it’ll be OK’’’, ‘‘‘You’ll just have to crack on’’’
          • the writer uses language to create a sense of doubt which increases tension
            for the reader: ‘Even if they noticed me, there was little they could do’,
            ‘perhaps with more confidence than he felt’, ‘though at far greater risk to
            their own survival’
          • onomatopoeia is used to demonstrate the impact of the accident: ‘snap’,
            ‘plod’
          • the writer uses language to show contrast between companionship and
            individual effort: ‘my partners’, ‘close-knit team’, ‘every man for himself’, ‘I
            must somehow make it on my own’, ‘‘‘we’ll never separate too far from
            you’’’, ‘two remaining companions’, ‘The other two would drag him on a
            sledge’
          • simile with hyperbole is used to heighten the fear felt by the writer: ‘the
            pain and an icy polar wind closed in on me like a pack of wolves around an
            injured animal’, ‘fear acted like a shot of adrenaline’
          • language is used to suggest fear and danger: ‘searing pain’, ‘truly
            frightened’, ‘fear’, ‘grim’, ‘died of exposure and starvation’, ‘incapacitated’,
            ‘risk’, ‘survival’, ‘die’, ‘suffering’, ‘injuries’
          • references to dates and numbers show the historical background to and
            scale of the expedition, creating context: ‘—Sunday, December 15, 1985—’,
            ‘471 miles from the starting point’, ‘With 424 miles still to go’, ‘74 years
            before us’, ‘weeks before’
          • the writer uses negatives to show the potential failure of the expedition:
            ‘the point of no return’, ‘we carried no radio and thus could not summon
            help’, ‘would not heal’
          • the metaphor that ends the extract also emphasises the potential failure of
            the expedition: ‘the narrow line we walked between success and disaster’.

          Responses may include the following points about the structure of the text:

          • the extract begins with a short sentence, creating a sense of foreboding: ‘It
            was a simple accident but a costly one’; a short sentence is also used for
            impact: ‘I agreed completely’
          • the writer uses the conjunction ‘but’ to focus the reader’s attention on what
            follows, creating an impact: ‘It was a simple accident but a costly one’,
            ‘brave but despairing words’, ‘serious but far from hopeless’

                                                                                              7
                                                                                      PMT




• repetition of ‘simply’ demonstrates ease, creating a sense of irony in the
  writer’s difficult situation
• the writer’s internal monologue to himself shows his feelings after the
  accident: ‘“This time you’ve had it”’, and the use of first-person narrative
  creates sympathy for the writer and anxiety for his safety
• the writer uses commas to punctuate sentences, creating an idea of pace:
  ‘As I went down, I heard the ligaments in my knee snap and thought
  simply,’
• the writer uses dashes and ellipsis to emphasise points and create an idea
  of context: ‘—Sunday, December 15, 1985—’, ‘‘‘at this point…’’’
• the writer begins some sentences with prepositions, creating impact or
  emphasis: ‘As I sat motionless’, ‘With 424 miles still to go’, ‘Like Scott 74
  years before us’
• the text uses some statements which have a factual tone, creating a
  contrast with the emotional intensity of the writer’s experience
• this also contrasts with the use of the short speech from Roger and the
  excerpt from Scott’s diary which gives the views of others, adding veracity
  to the writer’s account.

                                                                    (15 marks)




                                                                                  8
                                                                                         PMT




Level     Mark    AO2: Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use
                  language and structure to achieve effects and influence
                  readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their
                  views
          0       No rewardable material.

Level 1   1–3     • Limited comment on the text.
                  • Identification of the language and/or structure used to
                    achieve effects and influence readers.
                  • The use of references is limited.

Level 2   4–6     • Comment on the text.
                  • Comment on the language and/or structure used to achieve
                    effects and influence readers, including use of vocabulary.
                  • The selection of references is valid, but not developed.
                  NB: The mark awarded cannot progress beyond the top of
                  Level 2 if only language OR structure has been considered.

Level 3   7–9     • Explanation of the text.
                  • Explanation of how both language and structure are used to
                    achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                    vocabulary and sentence structure.
                  • The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to
                    the points being made.

Level 4   10–12   • Exploration of the text.
                  • Exploration of how both language and structure are used to
                    achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                    vocabulary, sentence structure and other language
                    features.
                  • The selection of references is detailed, appropriate and fully
                    supports the points being made.

Level 5   13–15   • Analysis of the text.
                  • Analysis of how both language and structure are used to
                    achieve effects and influence readers, including use of
                    vocabulary, sentence structure and other language
                    features.
                  • The selection of references is discriminating and clarifies
                    the points being made.




                                                                                     9
                                                                                         PMT




Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information      Mark
Number     and ideas
4          Accept any reasonable answer, based on lines 1-5.                  (1)

           The ladders of Everest are almost as famous as the
           mountain itself. Sometimes with up to four ladders all
           lashed taut, they are used as temporary bridges to span
           the crevasses that cut across the icefall like lightning
           bolts. These crevasses can be hundreds of feet deep and
           20 feet wide. The ladders have been used for many years
           as an easily adjustable way of breaching and crossing
           the huge gaps that spread across the ice like veins.

           Quotations and candidate's own words are acceptable.

           For example:
           • they are nearly as famous as Everest itself (1)
           • ‘lashed taut’ (1)
           • ‘they are used as temporary bridges’ (1)
           • they ‘have been used for many years’ (1)
           • they help people to cross crevasses (1)
           • ‘an easily adjustable way of breaching and crossing the huge
             gaps’ (1)


Question   AO1: Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information      Mark
Number     and ideas
5          Accept any reasonable answer, based on lines 7-8.                  (1)

           The ladders are put in place by an expert team of sherpas called
           the Icefall Doctors, who traverse* the route daily, adding new
           ladders and ropes through the ice.

           Quotations and candidate's own words are acceptable.

           For example:
           • they put ladders in place (1)
           • ‘traverse the route daily’ (1)
           • ‘adding new ladders’ (1)
           • they add new ropes (1)




                                                                                    10
                                                                                                        PMT




Question   Indicative content
Number
6          Reward responses that evaluate how successfully the writer creates tension.

           References to writer’s techniques should only be credited at Level 2 and
           above if they support the critical judgement of the text.

           Responses may include:
           • the extract starts with ladders, which are associated with the idea of potential
             danger from falls at height, or bad luck in superstition, successfully creating a sense
             of foreboding
           • the opening of the extract is focused on the idea of vastness, which contrasts with
             the idea of one single man crossing, building tension as it seems an impossible
             challenge: ‘to span the crevasses’, ‘hundreds of feet deep and 20 feet wide’, ‘the
             huge gaps’
           • the idea of the ladders being ‘temporary bridges’ and ‘easily adjustable’ creates a
             sense that the writer is showing them to be the opposite of permanent and fixed,
             emphasising the element of risk involved in the crossing
           • the writer’s focus on the idea that the ladders have been in place over a long period
             of time could on the one hand be reassuring, reducing the tension of the crossing, or
             concerning, in that they may not hold or last because of their age: ‘The ladders have
             been used for many years’
           • the writer’s focus on the regularly occurring events could also possibly be reassuring,
             which some readers may find reduces the potential tension of the crossing: ‘As the
             glacier shifts, so too does the icefall’, ‘Crevasses open and close, widen and narrow’,
             ‘The ladders are put in place by an expert team of sherpas…who traverse the route
             daily’
           • the writer’s focus on the idea that the ropes and ladders are put in place by ‘an
             expert team’ again could be more reassuring as they have experience and
             knowledge; the fact that they are referred to as ‘Icefall Doctors’ effectively links to
             people who are trusted in society to take care of others
           • the placing of the writer’s description of the impending danger of the crossing
             undercuts any more reassuring comments, creating an increased sense of tension:
             ‘disappearing into the depths of the crevasse and certain death’, ‘little chance of
             surviving a fall into one of these bottomless cracks in the ice’, ‘Instant death would
             certainly be preferable’, ‘I risked…plunging into the abyss’
           • the idea of increasing challenge in the actions the writer has to do to make the
             crossing is successful in building tension: ‘Have you ever tried walking across a
             horizontal ladder?’, ‘try doing it wearing clunky boots with crampons, in the dark,
             across a seemingly bottomless drop, in thin, oxygen-deprived air and it’s a whole
             other challenge’; the added layers of challenge build tension as it seems almost
             impossible
           • the writer subtly moves from the ideas of the expanse and danger of the physical
             surroundings at the start of the extract to his feelings and emotions about the
             crossing, which makes the reader more aware of the significance of these feelings:
             ‘It used to make me shiver just thinking about it’, ‘Very carefully, I…gingerly placed’,
             ‘heart racing’, ‘I could feel a bead of sweat on my brow’
           • these feelings are also emphasised through the contrast between the description of
             the ladders and ropes at the start and the end, showing that, although they may
             appear safe, using them is a tense and terrifying experience: ‘The two ladders began
             to bow and wobble’, ‘the rudimentary rope’
           • the writer’s uplifting physical and emotional feelings at the end of the extract
             emphasise and contrast with how tense the crossing has been, effectively illustrating
             the idea of a danger being overcome: ‘I felt dizzy’, ‘I wanted to kiss the ground’,
             ‘The relief…was overwhelming’, ‘I felt a buzz of endorphins and euphoria.’
                                                                                          (15 marks)


                                                                                         11
                                                                                          PMT




Level     Mark    AO4: Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate
                  textual reference
          0       No rewardable material.

Level 1   1–3     • Description of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  • Limited assertions are offered about the text.
                  • The use of references is limited.

Level 2   4–6     • Comment on ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  • Straightforward opinions with limited judgements are offered
                    about the text.
                  • The selection of references is valid, but not developed.

Level 3   7–9     • Explanation of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  • Informed judgement is offered about the text.
                  • The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to the
                    points being made.

Level 4   10–12   • Analysis of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  • Well-informed and developed critical judgement is offered
                    about the text.
                  • The selection of references is appropriate, detailed and fully
                    supports the points being made.

Level 5   13–15   • Evaluation of ideas, events, themes or settings.
                  • There is a sustained and detached critical overview and
                    judgement about the text.
                  • The selection of references is apt and discriminating and is
                    persuasive in clarifying the points being made.




                                                                                     12
                                                                                                  PMT




Question   Indicative content
Number
7(a)       Candidates must draw on BOTH texts to access marks.

           Responses may include:

           • both explorers have an individual connection to their expeditions and
             experiences
           • both explorers experience support from other people: in Text 1 Robert Swan is
             supported by his partners ‘Gareth Wood and Roger Mear’, and in Text 2 Ben
             Fogle is supported by the efforts of the ‘expert team of sherpas’
           • both explorers also show the importance of individual effort in their
             expeditions: in Text 1 the writer says ‘it was every man for himself’ and in Text
             2 the writer says ‘I have never focused so hard as I lifted one foot in front of
             the other’
           • both explorers experience fear in their expeditions: in Text 1 Swan says ‘I was
             truly frightened’, and in Text 2 Fogle says ‘The relief of getting off that ladder
             was overwhelming’
           • in both texts the explorers are determined to achieve their goals: in Text 1
             Swan says ‘I must simply plod ahead and not lose spirit’, and in Text 2 Fogle
             says ‘I have never focused so hard’
           • in both texts the explorers get a foot stuck/experience problems: in Text 1
             Swan wedges his foot and says ‘I heard the ligaments in my knee snap’, and in
             Text 2 Fogle’s foot appears to be trapped, ‘My left foot wouldn’t budge…I
             couldn’t lift it from the ladder’
           • both explorers describe equipment and people that help them in their
             expeditions: in Text 1 Swan has a sledge and a ‘waist harness’ and is inspired
             by Robert Scott, and in Text 2 Fogle describes the ladders and ropes, safety
             lines, harnesses and crampons and is reassured by the support put in place by
             the ‘Icefall Doctors’
           • both explorers understand the danger of death in their expeditions. In Text 1
             Swan says ‘If two men became incapacitated, the third would have to attempt
             to tow one and leave the other to die’, and in Text 2 Fogle says ‘There was little
             chance of surviving a fall into one of these bottomless cracks in the ice’
           • both explorers describe their thoughts and feelings retrospectively: in Text 1
             Swan says ‘My own situation was serious but far from hopeless’, and says
             ‘Fortunately I could still move’, and in Text 2 Fogle says ‘It used to make me
             shiver just thinking about it’ and ‘I felt a buzz of endorphins and euphoria.’

                                                                                   (6 marks)

Level      Mark       AO1: Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
           0          No rewardable material.

Level 1    1–2        • Limited understanding of similarities.
                      • Limited synthesis of the two texts.
                      • The use of evidence is limited.
Level 2    3–4        • Sound understanding of similarities.
                      • Clear synthesis of the two texts.
                      • The selection of evidence is valid but not developed and
                        there may be an imbalance.
Level 3    5–6        • Detailed understanding of similarities.
                      • Detailed synthesis of the two texts.
                      • The selection of evidence is appropriate and relevant to the
                        points being made.



                                                                                       13
                                                                                                         PMT




  In responses to the following question, examiners should be aware of the different ways
  candidates may structure their responses. There should be sufficient evidence in the
  response analysing each text and comparing the texts to reward responses.

  Responses that are unbalanced will not be able to access Level 3 or above,
  where explanation of writers’ ideas and perspectives is required alongside a
  range of comparisons between texts.

Question   Indicative content
Number
7(b)       Reward responses that compare how each writer presents ideas and perspectives about
           danger.

           Responses may include:
           • both texts are written in the first person, giving a personal perspective on danger
           • both texts show the significance of danger in their openings, although in Text 1 it is
             explicit as it mentions an accident, ‘It was a simple accident but a costly one’, and
             Text 2 is more implicit as it describes the measures taken to minimise danger: ‘The
             ladders have been used for many years’
           • both texts show danger caused by the trapping of feet, although in Text 1 the
             trapping causes injury, ‘I heard the ligaments in my knee snap’, whereas in Text 2 the
             trapping causes no injury, just tension, ‘I could feel a bead of sweat on my brow’
           • both texts use language to show their reactions at the time to danger in the
             respective situations: in Text 1 ‘the pain and an icy polar wind closed in on me like a
             pack of wolves around an injured animal’, and in Text 2 ‘I risked falling off balance
             and plunging into the abyss’, ‘There was little chance of surviving a fall into one of
             these bottomless cracks in the ice’
           • both texts show the determination of the explorers to overcome danger: in Text 1 the
             writer says ‘Fortunately I could still move’, and in Text 2 the writer says ‘I have never
             focused so hard as I lifted one foot in front of the other’
           • both texts use language to show awareness of the potential for further danger: in Text
             1 the writer makes reference to how Scott ‘and his two remaining companions died of
             exposure and starvation’, and in Text 2 the writer says ‘Instant death would certainly
             be preferable to surviving a fall and ending up in the cavernous depths’
           • both texts show how danger also comes from lack of communication with the outside
             world: in Text 1 ‘we carried no radio and thus could not summon help’, and in Text 2 a
             fall could mean ‘ending up in the cavernous depths, hundreds of feet beneath a glacier
             and far from any chance of rescue’
           • in Text 1 the main focus of the danger occurs at the start of the extract, whereas in
             Text 2 the dangerous event is towards the end
           • both texts talk about minimising or responding to danger, although Text 1 has a
             bleaker perspective than Text 2. In Text 1 the writer shows what is in place in case of
             incapacitation: ‘Roger and Gareth and I had long ago agreed what we would do if one
             of us became totally incapacitated’; Text 2 talks about safety features such as the
             ladders ‘put in place by an expert team of sherpas’, and how ‘These safety lines would
             stop us from disappearing into the depths of the crevasse’
           • Text 1 explores the feelings of different explorers towards danger, whereas Text 2
             presents the feelings of only one explorer, despite mentioning ‘our’ and ‘us’
           • in Text 1 there is an uncertain end to the extract, suggesting that more danger may
             be ahead: ‘a constant reminder of the narrow line we walked between success and
             disaster’; whereas Text 2 has a positive outcome, suggesting that danger is overcome
             completely: ‘The relief of getting off that ladder was overwhelming. I felt a buzz of
             endorphins and euphoria.’

                                                                                         (14 marks)




                                                                                           14
                                                                                         PMT




Level     Mark    AO3: Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how
                  these are conveyed, across two or more texts
          0       No rewardable material.

Level 1   1–2     • The response does not compare the texts.
                  • Description of writers’ ideas and perspectives, including theme,
                    language and/or structure.
                  • The use of references is limited.

Level 2   3–5     • The response considers obvious comparisons between the texts.
                  • Comment on writers’ ideas and perspectives, including theme,
                    language and/or structure.
                  • The selection of references is valid, but not developed.
                  NB: The mark awarded cannot progress beyond the top of
                  Level 2 if only ONE text has been considered in detail.

Level 3   6–8     • The response considers a range of comparisons between the texts.
                  • Explanation of writers’ ideas and perspectives including theme,
                    language and/or structure.
                  • The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to the
                    points being made.

Level 4   9–11    • The response considers a wide range of comparisons between the
                    texts.
                  • Exploration of writers’ ideas and perspectives including how the
                    theme, language and/or structure are used across the texts.
                  • References are balanced across both texts and fully support the
                    points being made.

Level 5   12–14   • The response considers a varied and comprehensive range of
                    comparisons between the texts.
                  • Analysis of writers’ ideas and perspectives including how the
                    theme, language and/or structure are used across the texts.
                  • References are balanced across both texts, they are
                    discriminating, and clarify the points being made.




                                                                                    15
                                                                                               PMT




                          Section B: Transactional Writing

  Refer to the writing assessment grids at the end of this section when marking
                            Question 8 and Question 9.

Question   Indicative content
Number
*8         Purpose: to write an article for a magazine to inform or advise.

           Audience: the writing is for a general readership. The focus is on
           communicating ideas about travelling to different places. This can involve a
           range of approaches.

           Form: the response should be set out as an article using organisational
           features. Some candidates may use stylistic conventions of an article such as
           sub-headings or occasional use of bullets. Candidates do not have to include
           features of layout like columns or pictures. There should be clear organisation
           and structure with an introduction, development of points and a conclusion.

           Responses may:
             • identify positive things about visiting different places, for example
               experiencing new culture, geography and people, seeing important
               landmarks in history or architecture, visiting friends or family, having the
               opportunity to work in a different area
             • identify and explain things the writer does not like about travelling, for
               example travelling alone, the expense, the journey time, dangers to
               personal safety, personal difficulties between people in groups of
               travellers
             • offer advice about how travellers can avoid difficulties, for example being
               well-prepared, getting enough rest if there are differences in time zones,
               looking after health and wellbeing, keeping personal belongings safe,
               taking out insurance.

                                                                               (40 marks)

           (includes 16 marks for the range of vocabulary and sentence structures
           for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate use of spelling and
           punctuation)




                                                                                          16
                                                                                               PMT




Question   Indicative content
Number
*9         Purpose: to write a letter to the Headteacher or Principal to inform and/or
           persuade.

           Audience: Headteacher or Principal. The focus is on communicating ideas about
           exploration of our planet. This can involve a range of approaches.

           Form: the response should be set out as a letter using organisational features.
           There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
           development of points and a conclusion.

           Responses may:
             • share views on exploration of our planet, for example it is natural to be
               curious and want to explore, it helps us find out new information about
               places, species, people, ways of living, it is expensive and this money could
               be spent on more essential things
             • identify and explain possible harm explorers may be doing to the planet,
               for example damaging cultures by making them more accessible to a
               broader audience in the outside world, encouraging more people to go to
               new places therefore putting pressure on them to become more ‘tourist-
               friendly’, creating environmental problems such as litter, pollution or
               damage to flora and fauna
             • identify and explain things that are being done, or should be done, to
               ensure exploration is safe, for example improving conditions for explorers,
               charging people who want to explore, encouraging safety and attempting
               to alleviate environmental damage.
                                                                                 (40 marks)

           (includes 16 marks for the range of vocabulary and sentence structures
           for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate use of spelling and
           punctuation)




                                                                                     17
                                                                                               PMT




              Writing assessment grids for Question 8 and Question 9
AO5:
• Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
  tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to
  support coherence and cohesion of texts


Level     Mark       The candidate:

          0          • provides no rewardable material


Level 1   1–4        • offers a basic response, with audience and/or purpose not fully
                       established
                     • expresses information and ideas, with limited use of structural and
                       grammatical features


Level 2   5–9        • shows an awareness of audience and purpose, with
                       straightforward use of tone, style and register
                     • expresses and orders information and ideas; uses paragraphs and
                       a range of structural and grammatical features


Level 3   10–14      • selects material and stylistic or rhetorical devices to suit audience
                       and purpose, with appropriate use of tone, style and register
                     • develops and connects appropriate information and ideas;
                       structural and grammatical features and paragraphing make
                       meaning clear


Level 4   15–19      • organises material for particular effect, with effective use of tone,
                       style and register
                     • manages information and ideas, with structural and grammatical
                       features used cohesively and deliberately across the text


Level 5   20–24      • shapes audience response with subtlety, with sophisticated and
                       sustained use of tone, style and register
                     • manipulates complex ideas, utilising a range of structural and
                       grammatical features to support coherence and cohesion.




                                                                                         18
                                                                                            PMT




AO6: Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation


Level     Mark    The candidate:

          0       •   provides no rewardable material

Level 1   1-3     •   uses basic vocabulary, often misspelled
                  •   uses punctuation with basic control, creating undeveloped, often
                      repetitive, sentence structures

Level 2   4-6     •   writes with a range of correctly spelt vocabulary, e.g. words with
                      regular patterns such as prefixes, suffixes, double consonants
                  •   uses punctuation with control, creating a range of sentence
                      structures, including coordination and subordination

Level 3   7-9     •   uses a varied vocabulary and spells words containing irregular
                      patterns correctly
                  •   uses accurate and varied punctuation, adapting sentence structure
                      to contribute positively to purpose and effect

Level 4   10-12   •   uses a wide, selective vocabulary with only occasional spelling
                      errors
                  •   positions a range of punctuation for clarity, managing sentence
                      structures for deliberate effect

Level 5   13-16   •   uses an extensive vocabulary strategically; rare spelling errors do
                      not detract from overall meaning
                  •   punctuates writing with accuracy to aid emphasis and precision,
                      using a range of sentence structures accurately and selectively to
                      achieve particular effects.




                                                                                     19
