GCSE
English Language
8700/2

Report on the Examination

June 2024

Version: 1.0
Contents
The below table is interactive. You can press the control button click on the title of the question to go
directly to that page.


 Contents                                                                                             Page


 Summary                                                                                                    3
 Assessment objectives                                                                                      4
 Individual questions                                                                                       5
 Further support                                                                                        14




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                      2 of 15
Summary
Overall performance compared to last year
The overall performance of students saw modest increases across the Reading questions and established
a consistent standard of achievement in the Writing task. Overall, the mean mark increased in
comparison to June 2023 which signified improvement in performance across the assessment as a
whole. The mean mark for all Section A tasks (with the exception of Question 1) improved, indicating a
continued incremental rise in mean marks since the disruption of 2020 and 2021. This demonstrates an
increased confidence amongst students as they approach the assessment and suggests that a more
secure foundation of skills has been established. The mean marks for Writing have remained stable and
represent continuity rather than progress in this area, which might indicate a focus for centres as they
prepare students for assessment in 2025.



Question paper and source texts
The source texts used in this series focused on the world of medicine and the experience of two medical
practitioners. Whilst students were unlikely to have direct experience of working in a hospital, most
would have had some interaction with a doctor or nurse and therefore this represented a fairly universal
experience for this cohort.

Adam Kay’s autobiographical account of his journey from student to junior doctor was immediately
appealing to students as they followed the trajectory of his career from college and university admissions
through to the first shifts on the hospital ward. They responded with enthusiasm to his glee and delight
in qualifying; engaged closely with the anticlimax and disappointment as the reality of his experience
appeared to see his dreams shattered in a nightmare scenario on the night shift, but ultimately
empathised with his confident self-assertion of his own position as a fully qualified doctor. In contrast,
students were often already familiar with Mary Seacole, either through the KS3 History curriculum or
through the poetry in the anthology for Literature. They responded with an equivalent enthusiasm to her
selfless compassion and commitment to her patients, regardless of the privations and basic conditions of
the field hospital on the wharf.

The questions and text extracts represented a high level of familiarity for students, being very much in
line with the tasks and source material selected for previous series. There were no surprises in the
wording or phrasing of the questions which followed a similar pattern in addressing the same
Assessment Objectives across the paper. The source material was accessible to students of all ability
levels, although there were some occasional misinterpretations as is inevitable with a very large, mixed
cohort. A few students thought Adam Kay was loving the night shift as he compared it to ‘Disneyland’ and
others misunderstood the context for Seacole’s voluntary role, but in the vast majority of cases, students
grasped both the main content and action of the texts and absorbed much of the more nuanced ideas
they contained.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                   3 of 15
Assessment objectives
 AO                                                     Common student errors

 AO1
 Identify and interpret explicit and implicit           Focusing on how the writers felt about the
 information and ideas. Select and synthesise           workplace rather than the workplace per se
 evidence from different texts.

 AO2
 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use        Failing to explain the ‘how’ and ‘why’ of the
 language and structure to achieve effects and          language features used by writers
 influence readers, using relevant subject
 terminology to support their views.

 AO3
 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as    Making assumptions about class, race and
 how these are conveyed, across two or more texts.      gender which were not supported by the text

 AO5
 Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively,    Ideas in response to the task were often
 selecting and adapting tone, style and register for    generalised and students did not provide
 different forms, purposes and audiences. Organise      specific examples to substantiate their view
 information and ideas, using structural and
 grammatical features to support coherence and
 cohesion of texts.

 AO6
 Students must use a range of vocabulary and            More sophisticated vocabulary not deployed
 sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect,   precisely and often spelt inaccurately
 with accurate spelling and punctuation. (This
 requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for
 each specification as a whole).




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                      4 of 15
Individual questions
Question 1
The first task provides an accessibly ‘way in’ to reading the first of the two texts and provides students
with a confidence-building approach to the tasks which follow. The mean mark for Question 1 in June
2024 increased compared to June 2023 and more than 85% of students scored either three or four marks,
which indicates a high level of understanding.

There was a combination of explicit information and implicit ideas in the designated section of text in
Source A which was based on Kay’s experience of moving from school to university. The text adopts a
humorous and sarcastic tone from the start and it helped for students to identify this and recognise that
the writer’s meanings were often hyperbolic or figurative rather than factual and literal. Understanding
tone is an important part of reading and one or two statements required some understanding of this to
correctly identify them as true or false. This is used to ensure that comprehension is assessed and
distinctions are made at the top of the ability level as well as lower down.

Common strengths in responses

The students who achieved full marks were able to identify the information accurately; made effective
inferences regarding the narrator’s experience and were able to track the information in the eight
statements chronologically through the given extract. They were able to interpret the tone and ideas of
the opening paragraphs to understand Adam Kay’s excitement at the prospect of becoming a doctor and
to appreciate that the mention of ‘six long years’ meant that time passed slowly. This was an appropriate
test of reading comprehension which successfully discriminated between students.



Common misunderstandings
The most frequently selected ‘incorrect’ choices were those where students misunderstood the year
when the writer finished medical school and incorrectly assumed that Kay believed changing his name
would make him a criminal. Statements 4 and 7 were most commonly selected as true. The first of these
errors would likely have been the result of misunderstanding the timeline of his training and that when
he packed his bags he was finishing rather than just starting his medical journey. The second of the errors
was likely a consequence of judging the facetious comment about changing his name to be literal rather
than a vivid allusion. These are critical reading skills and are an appropriate foundation for the
assessment of AO1 skills in this question.

Students should be encouraged to read through all the statements before selecting any as true and then
read the short passage again. The statements are in chronological order and should be read through and
matched against the text extract in order before selecting any of them. The lines indicated are very short
and should therefore not take much time to re-read. After the four statements have been selected as
‘true,’ they should be read again to check that they are correct.

Question 2
The question focused on the workplaces where the nurse and the doctor were based and the differences
between them. Students were asked to select relevant details from each text related to the places,
interpret this information and infer meaning from these ideas. In addition, they were expected to
© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                    5 of 15
synthesise the ideas and information, interpreting the differences (and any similarities) between the
texts.

The focus for Question 2 is designed to avoid overlap with the focus for Question 4. The focus on where
the writers were working gave opportunity for students to write about not only the physical
characteristics of the place – a modern British hospital and a makeshift field hospital on a wharf in a
foreign country – but also allowed students to write about the conditions of the workplace: the
challenge, the commitment, the colleagues, the level of organisation, the equipment available to them,
the wider resources etc. Students need to put to one side how the writers feel about these conditions in
order to write about the workplace itself and interpret the differences between the two workplaces. In
too many cases, students leaped to respond to this question in a way which better suited a response to
Question 4 and as a result, could not be rewarded with clear or detailed focus on the task.

There was plenty of relevant material to draw on regarding the different workplaces. In Source A, the
hospital was modern, technologically advanced, large, permanent, purpose-built, with different
departments, well-staffed (at times) and with considerable expertise on hand. By contrast, the workplace
Seacole encountered was temporary, under-staffed, poorly resourced, transitory, disorganised and with
limited expertise to draw on. These ideas provided a rich pool of material for students to synthesise and
interpret.

Performance on this question was very similar to performance in 2023, with a mean mark of 3.5. This
means that the average student was able to make some attempt to infer and identify some differences,
indicating achievement at the top of Level 2. A similar number of students were awarded Level 4 as in
2023, with just over 3% of students awarded marks in the highest level. This is the lowest proportion of
Level 4 marks on any question, which serves as a reminder of the challenges inherent in this task. It
remains an area where students could make significant gains given appropriate targeted support.

Common strengths in responses
The strongest responses were those where students focused very clearly on the places described in the
two texts. Rather than allow themselves to be sidetracked by the writers’ perspectives on their work,
these students focused exclusively on the place itself and the concrete details of their working
environment as well as the conditions of their employment there. Typical of these students’ responses
was a continual reference explicitly to the task in order to maintain the clarity of their focus.

To achieve Level 3, students were able to identify ‘like for like’ differences in the workplaces – the level of
organisation for example – and to interpret from this that whereas the hospital had procedures and
‘ward rounds’ which gave it the air of a controlled and calm environment, the wharf was a chaotic sprawl
of ships and injured soldiers where there appeared to be no order, no procedure, and no organisation
which left patients without proper care.

To achieve the highest level, students need firstly to be clear in their interpretations and then to provide
additional detail about their ideas and extend their understanding to include concepts such as the level
of autonomy both writers’ experienced, with the mayhem of the workplace allowing Seacole to act
independently and without scrutiny whereas Kay was subject to considerable supervision in the hospital,
treated like a ‘hypnotised duckling’ and given very limited autonomy despite his extensive training,
adding to his frustration at the working conditions, but contributing to Seacole’s sense of fulfilment and
satisfaction on the wharf.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                        6 of 15
Common misunderstandings
The weaker responses were often characterised by a poor focus on the task. Many students were
distracted by the writers’ experiences of their work and failed to focus sufficiently on the different places
in the source texts. Inferences relating to the writers’ experiences in the hospital or on the wharf or their
feelings about the care they were offering were rewarded therefore as ‘attempts’ (Level 2). Writers’
perspectives are central to the focus of the Question 4 task, and no reference to these can be rewarded at
Level 3 or Level 4 in Question 2 because the Assessment Objectives are very different. To achieve Level 3
or higher, responses must address the correct focus. There were instances where students using a
keyboard to type their responses simply copied and pasted their response to Question 2 to use it again
for Question 4, which exemplifies the misjudgement of believing that the tasks are rewarding the same
skills.

Many students simply wrote about feelings and attitudes and ignored the focus on the place entirely.
Students need to identify relevant and appropriate details from the two texts, such as the fact that
Seacole can only treat the soldier by easing his dressings and has nothing else to offer him except a cup
of tea, whereas Kay can offer his patients treatment by referring them for scans and tests in other
departments in the hospital. They need to link these directly to the focus of the task – the workplace.
Students should then ask themselves what this tells us about the two workplaces – that one has more
resources than the other and is likely to offer better results for patients, perhaps. It is the development
and explanation of straight-forward points such as these which will lift responses from Level 2 to Level 3.



Question 3

The task in Q3 was to identify interesting uses of language and comment on the effects they create in
relation to the focus of the question, which was the description of Adam Kay’s night shift. The selected
passage in Source A provided a wealth of linguistic devices and evocative vocabulary for students to
comment on. Students tended to use the same few examples of language use, which demonstrated a
better selection than in recent series where some responses have been hindered by poor choices. In this
series, students invariably chose to comment on the simile comparing the nightshift which ‘made Hell
look like Disneyland;’ the metaphor of the enormous ship which was on fire and nobody had taught him
how to sail; and the repetitive list of ‘ward after ward…’ It is worth remembering that despite the fact
that a large volume of students have chosen these language devices to write about, every single
individual student was encountering the imagery and exploring the effects for themselves in an entirely
fresh way.

Performance on this question improved from 2023 with an increase in the mean mark to 6 marks. There
was also a significant increase in the number of Level 4 responses which rose to nearly 8%, which is a
very encouraging trend. This is likely to be the consequence of a well-judged selection of linguistic
features as well as the nature of the devices found in the text. The image of the ship, for example, is an
extended metaphor and where students were able to extend their own comment and accumulate a
number of effects as they addressed the different parts of the extended metaphor – that it was
‘enormous’ and ‘on fire’ – they inevitably provided more detail which is likely to lead to greater clarity.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                      7 of 15
Common strengths in responses

In Level 3, students were typically able to explain that the night shifts were torturous and gruesome as
the writer described them as making Hell look like Disneyland. There was a certain logic to this image,
which required students to understand that the night shifts were so hellish that in comparison the real
Hell looked as enticing as Disneyland. Students were often able to draw out the connotations of these
places and bring them together to explain just how awful the night shifts were. Many students, even
those who struggled with the more complex imagery of the Hell simile and the ship metaphor were
successful in commenting on the list of ‘emergency after emergency,’ explaining that the effect of this list
was to highlight the endless repetitive demands placed on Kay’s shoulders. This was a very effective way
of moving into Level 3 for a significant number of students.

The most successful responses extended the idea of Hell and Disneyland even further and were able to
write about Hell as a symbol of religious punishment and that Kay was experiencing a moral punishment
for the sins of arrogance and complacency. Or they developed the image of Hell by using the tagged-on
image of the ‘unrelenting nightmare’ and explored how Kay experienced the night shift as a place of
torment from which he could not wake or escape, a ritualised torment of surreal images and unbearable
responsibility which he suffered alone, every night, like the horror of a recurring nightmare.

Common misunderstandings
Some students misunderstood the image of Hell and Disneyland, concluding that this was a description
of how much fun the night shift turned out to be as it was being compared to a place of so much joy and
innocence. Where students have demonstrated some understanding, they are rewarded with marks in
Level 2 for an ‘attempt to comment on effect’, despite arriving at the opposite conclusion of the correct
one.

There still appears to be amongst some students a belief that the identification of language devices –
feature spotting – is sufficient to gain marks in response to Question 3. However, it is always and only the
quality of the comment on effect which attracts marks. The use of subject terms enhances the response
but cannot determine the level awarded. The text contained a wide variety of language features to
choose from. There were a number of students who wanted to identify some of the language devices in
the source text as personification, despite the absence of personification from the passage entirely. This
led students to try and explain how the paging device was personified, for example, and drew them away
from a more fruitful focus on the list of bleeps which would have been more fertile territory. The naming
of language features and the use of subject terminology is not treated as an equivalent skill; only the
comments on the effect of language can move a response into a higher level, not the ability to correctly
identify specific features.

Only just over 10% of students were awarded marks in Level 1 and 50% of students were awarded marks
in Level 3 and Level 4 which suggests that messages are being heard by students and they are responding
well. This is a solid foundation for future series and for these students, prepared them well for writing
about methods in Question 4.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                     8 of 15
Question 4
The task in Question 4 was to compare the writers’ feelings and perspectives on their attitudes towards
providing medical care, allowing students to consider the text extracts as a whole. The task required
students to engage with Adam Kay’s and Mary Seacole’s individual points of view and the methods they
use to convey their perspectives, as well as to compare the differences and similarities between their
points of view across the two extracts. There was certainly no shortage of points of contrast between the
two with students at all levels able to access the comparative nature of this task.

Most students appeared to find that Question 4 enabled them to write more freely and to show their
understanding of the ideas and perspectives in the two texts. There were many different perspectives to
medical care for students to identify and comment on: Kay’s attitudes shifted from an early complacency
and scepticism about the application to medical school to an arrogance about his knowledge and a
childish glee about changing his name; from a contemptuous disdain about his lack of autonomy as a
‘glorified personal assistant’ to a horror at the huge responsibility he was expected to bear on the night
shift; and finally to a resilient sense of pride in his achievement. Seacole offered an equally diverse range
of attitudes, from compassion, modesty, independence, initiative, pity, pride, despair and determination.

The mean mark for this question rose in 2024, compared to 2023. This reflects anecdotal evidence from
examiners who reported high levels of both engagement and clarity in the understanding of students.
There was an equivalent rise in the number of students awarded marks in Level 4, with just under 5%
achieving Level 4 in 2023 and just over 6% achieving Level 4 this summer.

Common strengths in responses
Level 3 responses were able, firstly, to identify aspects of Kay’s attitudes to medical care and to explain
their understanding. They did not simply assert that he was excited to be a doctor (as responses at Level
2 often did) but were able to explain that his comments on changing his name demonstrated his
excitement and anticipation, selecting relevant textual detail such as ‘like a superhero’ to support their
understanding. Responses at Level 3 were then able to explain that this simile showed how childish his
excitement was and that his motivation was about his own prestige rather than about helping other
people. This, of course, led students to make a direct ‘like for like’ comparison with Seacole, explaining
that she focuses instead on her patients, demonstrating her commitment to providing medical care, in
contrast to Kay’s selfish approach. Students demonstrating all three key skills for this question –
understanding, methods and comparison - were likely to be in the upper half of the level.

The most successful responses in Level 4 were able to offer a more subtle or more developed response to
each of the key skills, with some students, for example, building on a similar clear point to that in the
previous paragraph, to explore how Kay’s concern with status and changing his name indicated a self-
obsessed superiority complex resulting in a contempt and disregard for the patients he is intended to
serve. They conceptualised the effect of the simile ‘like a superhero’ to demonstrate the almost God-like
status of the doctor in society, as if they are capable of superpowers and are above mere mortals. This
was compared to the self-sacrificial modesty of Seacole, whose focus on her patients as individuals
presents a profound contrast and creates an impression of her modesty and almost angelic nature,
exploring how her selflessness reinforced the idea of medicine as a truly noble and selfless profession.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                      9 of 15
Common misunderstandings
Some students working at a lower level identified the writers’ perspectives using an adjective, such as
excited or caring, but did not provide an explanation to substantiate and secure their understanding.
How do we know that Adam Kay is excited about the prospect of becoming a doctor? How do we know
that Mary Seacole is a caring nurse? An appropriate quotation helps to illustrate the point, but students
need to demonstrate their own understanding to move from Level 2 to Level 3. An examiner wants to see
that a student is able to explain that when Kay states that his ‘spring couldn’t have been coiled any
tighter’ this shows how desperate he is to spring into action after all his training. Too many students were
able to provide the partial understanding of identifying his excitement but did not follow through with an
explanation.

Weaker responses tended to show some comparison of the two perspectives but again lacked the clarity
of explanation to secure a Level 3 mark. Their comparisons were more likely to be mismatched,
comparing one aspect of one source with a different aspect of the other, such as the busyness of the
night shift with the lack of resources on the wharf or Kay’s horror at being ‘drenched in bodily fluids’ with
Seacole’s admiration for the ‘kind-hearted doctors’ she worked with. For responses to be awarded at
Level 3, students are required to make ‘like for like’ comparisons, contrasting the different ways in which
Kay and Seacole are treated by their senior colleagues, for example, or the different ways they treat their
patients. It can be helpful for a student to begin a paragraph with the overarching comparison to ensure
they are comparing ‘like for like’ before going on to explain how this is shown in each of the two texts.

There were still too many responses to Question 4 which failed to incorporate some mention of methods.
Central to this task is the expectation that students will write about how the writers convey their
perspectives and feelings. If this key skill is not addressed, examiners can only award marks in the lower
half of the level, which has a clear impact on the overall mark. This was most frequently reported in
students working at Level 2 but also affected some students in Level 3. Having seen such an
improvement and such an impressive range of responses to Question 3, it is unfortunate to have seen so
many responses to Question 4 where those skills in commenting on language (or structure) were not
transferred and able to be rewarded.

Some students were keen to find an opportunity to write about race, class and gender in response to the
writers’ perspectives and this in itself is genuinely worth encouraging. However, the comments need to
be rooted in the text and there is unfortunately very limited, if any, reference to race in either text. There
is some potential for a discussion of class in the opening section of Source A, and there are clearly
references to gender in Source B, where Seacole’s womanly touch is commented upon by the sick
patient. However, examiners reported a number of occasions where students speculated about race and
gender in a way which felt ‘bolted-on’ rather than arising naturally from material contained in the text
itself. Just as context is a strand in GCSE English Literature responses, which need to be founded on
textual detail, not extraneous research, so do such comments in GCSE English Language in response to
the unseen texts.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                       10 of 15
Question 5
The task in Question 5 proposed that young people should adopt careers that made a contribution to
society as opposed to careers that prioritised wealth and status.

The question was an appropriate one for students at this particular juncture in their lives. The vast
majority of the cohort are 16-year-olds, at the point of leaving statutory education and for the first time
given some element of choice over the future direction of their lives. Post-16 students are equally at a
critical point in their lives, making decisions about the possibilities of university applications,
apprenticeships or other training or even full-time work. This gave students some genuine dilemmas to
ponder and some real-world relevance to the argument. It is not easy to find topics which offer a
universal appeal and a level playing field, but this task appeared to go some way towards achieving those
characteristics.

Students had plenty to say about the topic and their views fell into four very broad groups: some argued
forcefully for the freedom of choice, that nobody had the right to tell any individual student what they
‘should’ do and which careers they should choose; others were convinced that only ethical and moral
career opportunities should be chosen if young people wanted to address the terrible state of society we
see around us; yet others argued that, with the cost of living crisis, nobody could possibly deny another
the right to feed their own family above all else and therefore it was appropriate to pursue wealth and
influence; whilst a final group argued pragmatically that it was perfectly possible to achieve both aims by
earning sufficient income from a job of your choice and contributing to society in your spare time.

Some students responded well to the form of an article in a school or college magazine with a clear sense
of a young and impressionable audience in many of the writing responses. This was not always the case,
however, with many students writing more generically and overlooking the need to think carefully about
who the intended audience might be. In contrast to some more recent tasks, there was occasionally a
sense of flatness about some of the responses which lacked the liveliness of the speech in 2023, for
example. This was countered by some students by addressing their fellow students and engaging with
some sensitivity to the choices and decisions laid out before them, using language which was well-suited
to this age group.

Performance, in terms of the mean mark, was extremely stable with no change from 2023 for either AO5
or AO6. The mean mark for AO5 was at the top of Level 2 whilst the mean marks for Technical Accuracy
(AO6) were also high in Level 2. Almost half of students were awarded marks in Level 3 and Level 4 for
writing which confirms the experience of examiners who reported seeing many examples of clearly
expressed arguments.

There continues to be even more widespread evidence of prescriptive approaches to the writing task.
Examiners reported repeatedly seeing the phrase: ‘Picture this…’ or ‘Imagine this…’ in a huge proportion
of students’ responses. Also of concern were the same examples of ‘so-called’ ambitious vocabulary
shoe-horned into the students’ responses. Words such as ‘jubilant, euphoric, lackadaisical, indignant,
axiomatic’ were all seen repeatedly in students’ responses and very rarely were they used accurately. In
almost all cases, the vocabulary does not match the audience or the style and tone of the rest of the
writing and the words stand out as clumsy and imprecise. As such, ironically, they bring down the quality
of the writing rather than enhancing it and responses are more likely to receive a mark in Level 2 or Level
3 at the highest, depending on the other qualities demonstrated. There appeared to be fewer pre-
prepared responses, where students were primed with a generic argument about the ills of society where
they were instructed to ‘fill in the gaps’ with the given topic. It is hoped that centres have understood the
message that this type of approach reflects extremely poor practice and could be considered
malpractice, depending on the level of scaffolding provided.


© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                     11 of 15
There continues to be a deterioration in the quality of handwriting. A significant number of students
would have been better served by using a keyboard to write their responses to ensure that the quality of
their work can be read, understood, appreciated and rewarded in full.

Common strengths
The most successful responses were those where the student presented a coherent response to the
statement which took a general view on career options and then drilled down to explore the implications
of that perspective using a range of specific examples to illustrate and develop their points. Students at
Level 3 were able to provide clear connected ideas related to the necessity of making responsible
employment choices, for example, and offering environmental science as one option which would open
up opportunities for supporting a more sustainable society in the future. It is the specific examples which
provide students with the chance to demonstrate the development of their ideas.

The highest performing students were often able to develop an original voice in presenting their
argument and adopt a specific tone or approach which was either convincing or compelling, or both.
These arguments were often political, ethical, sociological, religious or economic in their thrust and were
presented by a passionate exponent. Tone is a powerful element of any writing, particularly in the writing
of non-fiction and is something which leaps off the page when it is executed effectively and confidently
by students. Responses rewarded at the highest level rarely write in neutral terms; they engage with their
readers intimately, leaving them in no doubt about their feelings on the topic. Typically, in response to
this task, students adopted a tone, perhaps, of simmering rage at the state of the world left to young
people by an older generation who have squandered and exploited earth’s precious resources and
hoarded great wealth but who have the audacity to propose that the younger generation should pick up
the pieces by dedicating themselves selflessly to society. Reading a diverse range of non-fiction texts to
explore and develop the idea of tone is a valuable route to improving marks for AO5 writing.

Technically, high performing students were reportedly using a wide variety of punctuation to support
more complex grammatical structures and to shape sentences created specifically for effect. Technical
skills were deployed deliberately to create effects and to enhance the content of their arguments.

Common misunderstandings
There were weaker responses which failed to meet the criteria for Level 2, often characterised by brevity
or a lack of focus. These responses tended to be very simple in their approach and offered a limited
variety of ideas about careers, mostly focusing on ‘doing good things’ for society. They often lacked any
structural features, such as paragraphs, to organise their ideas about what direction young people
should choose, with a limited and pedestrian vocabulary characterised by familiar, everyday words.
It appeared in the responses of students working at Level 2 that students’ had relatively limited
experience of the workplace and few students were able to draw on their work experience placements or
weekend jobs to inform their views on employment and future career opportunities. Many students
limited themselves to writing in very general terms about the world of work and stuck to very
conventional roles, such as doctor and teacher – influenced quite rightly by Source A – as those careers
which contribute directly to society. Indeed, there was in some responses a sense that unless you were
helping the homeless or working in a charity shop, you were pursuing a very selfish career path. The lack
of specific examples was typical of responses rewarded at Level 2 and is an area ripe for future
development.

A continued concern noted by examiners is the excessive length of some writing responses. Many
students are submitting a response which is four, five or even six pages long. It is fair to say that most
students have given a clear indication of the level at which they are working by the end of the first page

© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                     12 of 15
and have demonstrated the necessary skills by the end of the second or third page. To write at any
greater length, in fact, does many students a disservice as they are often unable to control the cohesion
of their argument or lose the consistency of their style or tone. The vast majority of students writing
beyond three sides do no more than offer ‘more of the same’ and risk detracting from the skills they have
evidenced earlier on. Clearly, the size of handwriting impacts on the number of pages a student uses, but
on average, three or four sides is a useful guide for students. The ability to write accurately, coherently
and concisely are real-world skills and students would be well-served by practising writing with a given
word count, for example, to support the succinctness of their responses in the exam.
In terms of technical accuracy, many weaker, longer responses demonstrated a lack of variety in the
sentence structures attempted, and a subsequent absence of a range of punctuation. Lack of control was
frequently evident in these responses as students struggled to maintain secure syntax over a number of
pages. Again, writing at length risks the possibility of students increasing the number of errors they
make. A shorter, more carefully crafted and accurately proofread response encourages students to think
more precisely about how to deploy their technical armoury and ensure that they have demonstrated the
widest possible range of sentence forms, for example, or punctuation marks. It is incontrovertible that
shorter, more considered, more concise responses lead to more reliable, more accurate writing and thus
will likely secure higher marks.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                   13 of 15
Further support
Mark ranges and award of grades
Grade boundaries and cumulative percentage grades are available on the results statistics page of
our website.

Enhanced Results Analysis (ERA)
Use our exam results analysis tool to create and customise as many different reports for comparison as
you like.

Professional development
Attend one of our feedback courses where you can review example responses from students and
commentaries from our examiners.




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                                 14 of 15
Contact us
Our friendly team will be happy to support you between 8am and 5pm, Monday to Friday.

Tel: 0161 953 7504

Email (GCSE): english-gcse@aqa.org.uk
Email (AS and A-level): english-gce@aqa.org.uk




© 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                      15 of 15
