1
GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
8700/2
Paper 2 Writers’ viewpoints and perspectives
Mark scheme
Sample assessment materials
First exam in June 2026
Version: 1.0GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
2
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant
questions, by a panel of subject teachers. This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the
standardisation events which all associates participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in
this examination. The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’
responses to questions and that every associate understands and applies it in the same correct way.
As preparation for standardisation each associate analyses a number of students’ scripts. Alternative
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for. If, after the
standardisation process, associates encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner.
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper. Assumptions about future mark
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination
paper.
No student should be disadvantaged on the basis of their gender identity and/or how they refer to the
gender identity of others in their exam responses.
A consistent use of ‘they/them’ as a singular and pronouns beyond ‘she/her’ or ‘he/him’ will be credited in
exam responses in line with existing mark scheme criteria.
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk
Copyright information
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third
party even for internal use within the centre.
Copyright © 2025 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
3
Introduction
The information provided for each question is intended to be a guide to the kind of answers anticipated
and is neither exhaustive nor prescriptive. All appropriate responses should be given credit.
Level of response marking instructions
Level of response mark schemes for GCSE English Language are broken down into four levels (where
appropriate). In the first column each level is identified with one or two key words that represent the
differences in the skills then described. These key words show the progression from Level 1 to 4 and
are:
Level 4 Perceptive, detailed
Level 3 Clear, relevant
Level 2 Some, attempts
Level 1 Simple, limited.
Level Keywords Typical qualities of comments at each level
4
Perceptive,
detailed
Developed, insightful, exploratory, subtle, confident, analytical, conceptual
sophisticated, nuanced synthesis/comparisons
3
Clear,
relevant
Accurate, complete in itself, well explained, directly focused on the task, like-for-like
synthesis/comparisons
2
Some
attempts
Incomplete ideas, partially correct, questionable, emerging, speculative, not like-for-
like synthesis/comparison
1
Simple,
limited
Generalised, repetitive, synonymous, paraphrased, obvious, basic, juxtaposition
rather than synthesis/comparison
This is followed in the second column by a description of the different qualities required in the student’s
answer for that level. These are called the skills descriptors. In order to reach a given level, a student
must fulfil one or more of the skills descriptors for that level.
The third column of the mark scheme is the Indicative Standard. This is an important feature of the mark
scheme for GCSE English Language. It provides exemplification of the skills descriptors at each level
and offers a small number of different comments at the required standard to give an indication of the
quality of response that is typical for that level. It shows the progression from Level 1 to 4.
The Indicative Standard is not intended to be a model answer nor a complete response, and it does not
exemplify required content. Students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the
quality demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that
level.
The standardising scripts will further exemplify each of the levels. You must refer to the standardising
material throughout your marking.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
4
Step 1 Annotate the response
When marking a response, you should first read through the student’s answer and annotate each section
using the comments from the statement bank to show the qualities that are being demonstrated, as
instructed during standardising. You can then award a level and a mark.
Step 2 Determine a level
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the
descriptors for that level. The descriptors for the level indicate the different qualities that might be seen in
the student’s answer for that level. If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer. With
practice and familiarity, you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the
lower levels of the mark scheme.
The Indicative Standard column in the mark scheme will help you determine the correct level.
Remember, students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the quality
demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that level. It
is not the number of references, but the quality of the comments that will determine the level. The
annotation you added to the script at Step 1 will help you determine the correct level.
Step 3 Determine a mark
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark. This requires you to fine tune within
the level to see how well each of the skills descriptors for that level has been met. A student only has to
meet a skills descriptor at a given level once to be awarded that level. Since responses rarely match a
level in all respects, you need to balance out the range of skills achieved and allow strong performance
in some aspects to compensate for other skills that may be only partially fulfilled. Again, the annotation
added at Step 1 will help you determine the mark.
Reference to the standardising scripts throughout the marking period is essential. This will help you
apply the level descriptors accurately and consistently. There will usually be an answer in the
standardising materials which will correspond with each level of the mark scheme. This answer will have
been awarded a mark by the Lead Examiner. You can compare the student’s answer with the example
to determine if it is the same standard, better or worse than the example. You can then use this to
allocate a mark for the answer based on the Lead Examiner’s mark on the example.
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate.
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
5
Advice
In fairness to students, all examiners must use the same marking methods. The following advice may
seem obvious, but all examiners must follow it closely.
1. Refer constantly to the mark scheme and standardising scripts throughout the marking period.
2. Always credit accurate, relevant and appropriate responses that are not necessarily covered by the
mark scheme or the standardising scripts.
3. Use the full range of marks. Do not hesitate to give full marks if the response merits it.
4. Remember the key to accurate and fair marking is consistency.
5. If you have any doubt about how to allocate marks to a response, consult your Team Leader.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
6
SECTION A: READING – Assessment Objectives
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas.
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts.
AO2 • Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to
achieve effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to
support their views.
AO3 • Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are
conveyed, across two or more texts.
AO4 • Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references.
SECTION B: WRITING – Assessment Objectives
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features
to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
AO6 • Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation.
(This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification
as a whole).GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
7
Assessment Objective Section A
AO1 
AO2 
AO3 
AO4 n/a
Section B
AO5 
AO6 GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
8
0 1 Read again the first part of Source A from lines 1 to 7.
Choose four statements below which are true.
• Shade the circles in the boxes of the ones that you think are true.
• Choose a maximum of four statements.
• If you make an error cross out the whole box.
• If you change your mind and require a statement that has been crossed out then draw
a circle around the box.
[4 marks]
A The writer is at the start of his train journey.
B The writer is looking forward to leaving the train.
C The writer will be on the train for three more days.
D The train has a carriage where meals are served.
E The writer thinks the bread has been delicious.
F The writer feels that he has been cut off from society while on the train.
G The writer has had many activities to keep him busy on the train.
H The writer does not have any plans for when he leaves the train.
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This assesses the first bullet point identify and interpret explicit and implicit information
and ideas.
A The writer is at the start of his train journey. [F]
B The writer is looking forward to leaving the train. [T]
C The writer will be on the train for three more days. [F]
D The train has a carriage where meals are served. [T]
E The writer thinks the bread has been delicious. [F]
F The writer feels that he has been cut off from society while on the train. [T]
G The writer has had many activities to keep him busy on the train. [F]
H The writer does not have any plans for when he leaves the train. [T]GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
9
0 2 You need to refer to Source A and Source B for this question.
The writers in Source A and Source B are travelling on different types of trains.
What can you infer about the differences between the two trains?
[8 marks]
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This question assesses both bullets
Level Skills descriptors Indicative standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level. It is not a model answer, nor a
complete response, nor does it seek to exemplify any particular
content.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
summary
7–8 marks
Shows perceptive or
detailed synthesis and
interpretation of both texts:
• makes perceptive
inferences from both texts
• selects judicious
references/use of textual
detail relevant to the
focus of the question
• statements show
perceptive differences
between texts.
The train in Source A reflects significant progress in
train travel. It is being used to transport mail and
people and so has a ‘mail van’, ‘a dining car’ and ‘five
sleeping cars’, showing both the advancement of
train manufacture and the purpose of rail travel to
enable long journeys by providing eating and
sleeping facilities. This relative luxury is a complete
contrast to Source B where the steam engine is an
earlier model and is, therefore, much simpler in its
design. In Source B, the train is just a functional
‘uncovered carriage’ with ‘benches’ as the purpose at
this earlier stage of invention is to develop the
mechanics of the engine, not provide more luxurious
passenger facilities.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
summary
5–6 marks
Shows clear synthesis and
interpretation of both texts:
• makes clear inferences
from both texts
• selects clear references/
textual detail relevant to
the focus of the question
• statements show clear
differences between
texts.
The train in Source A has an engine and several
carriages which include a ‘mail van’, ‘a dining car’
and ‘five sleeping cars’ showing that it is used to
transport letters and that people can eat and sleep
on it, which suggests how the train has been
developed to have a range of purposes. This is very
different to Source B, where the steam engine has
just been invented and has a much more basic
purpose which is to provide a new and quicker form
of transport. In Source B, the train is simply an
engine and an ‘uncovered carriage’ with ‘benches’,
so the lack of shelter and comfortable facilities
suggests it is in a much earlier stage of its
development.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
10
Level 2
Some attempts
at summary
3–4 marks
Shows some interpretation
from one/both texts:
• attempts some
inference(s) from
one/both texts
• selects some appropriate
references/textual detail
from one/both texts
• statements show some
difference(s) between
texts.
The train in Source A is long and has an engine and
several carriages including a ‘mail van’, ‘a dining car’
and ‘five sleeping cars’ which shows that the train is
used for many reasons. This is different from the
train in Source B, which is much shorter and has less
carriages. The train in Source B has just a ‘little
engine’ and an ‘uncovered carriage’ which shows it is
very basic.
Level 1
Simple, limited
summary
1–2 marks
Shows simple awareness
from one/both texts:
• offers paraphrase rather
than inference
• selects simple
reference(s)/textual
detail(s) from one/both
texts
• statements show simple
difference between texts.
The train in Source A is big as it has lots of carriages
because it says, ‘five sleeping cars’. This is different
to the train in Source B, which is smaller. The train in
Source B is not big as it is described as a ‘little
engine’ and it has one carriage.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
Note
• If the quality of the response is Level 1 but only deals with one text, the mark must be 1 not 2.
• If the quality of the response is Level 2 but only deals with one text, the mark must be 3 not 4.
• A candidate has to deal with both texts and address the correct focus of the question to achieve
Level 3 or above.
The focus of this question is the difference between the trains.
AO1 content may include the effect of ideas such as:
• size
• number of carriages
• facilities
• performance/ability
• stage in development
• number of passengers
• purpose/design.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
11
0 3 You now need to refer only to Source A from lines 12 to 23.
How does the writer use language to describe the train crash?
[12 marks]
AO2 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve
effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views.
This question assesses language i.e. words, phrases, language features, language
techniques, sentence forms.
Level Skills descriptors Indicative standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level. It is not a model answer, nor a
complete response, nor does it seek to exemplify any particular
content.
Level 4
Detailed,
perceptive
summary
10–12 marks
Shows detailed and
perceptive understanding of
language:
• analyses the effects of
the writer’s choices of
language
• selects a range of
judicious textual detail
• makes sophisticated and
accurate use of subject
terminology.
The writer uses the hyperbole ‘my heaviest suitcase
was cannonaded down’ to describe how the impact
of the train crash was like a deliberate act of warfare.
The use of the military verb ‘cannonaded’ conveys
the writer’s sense of being victimised as he describes
the simple dislodging of his suitcase by physical
force as a metaphorical attack by the train, as it has
turned his own possession into a weapon to be used
against him.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
explanation
7–9 marks
Shows clear understanding
of language:
• explains clearly the
effects of the writer’s
choices of language
• selects a range of
relevant textual detail
• makes clear and accurate
use of subject
terminology.
The writer uses the hyperbole ‘my heaviest suitcase
was cannonaded down’ to describe how the train
crash was so forceful that it felt like he was being
bombarded. The metaphor of ‘cannonaded’ suggests
that the impact of the train crash turns the suitcase
into a weapon being fired which creates the idea of
the writer being under attack.
Level 2
Some
understanding
and comment
4–6 marks
Shows some understanding
of language:
• attempts to comment on
the effect of language
• selects some appropriate
textual detail
• makes some use of
subject terminology,
mainly appropriately.
The writer uses lots of different language to describe
the train crash. He uses the hyperbole ‘my heaviest
suitcase was cannonaded down’ to show how the
force of the crash was powerful enough to move a
heavy object so that it smashed into his knees.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
12
Level 1
Simple, limited
summary
1–3 marks
Shows simple awareness of
language:
• offers simple comment on
the effect of language
• selects simple
reference(s) or textual
detail(s)
• makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately.
The writer describes the train crash as ‘From the rack
above me my heaviest suitcase was cannonaded
down’. This is hyperbole as it is just a suitcase hitting
his legs, but he uses this to emphasise how heavy it
was.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
Note
• If a student writes about language outside of the given lines or from the wrong source (but with the
correct focus), the response should be placed in the appropriate level according to the quality of
what is written, but placed at the bottom of the level.
• A student has to address the correct focus of the question to achieve Level 3 or above.
AO2 content may include the effect of language features such as:
• onomatopoeia – ‘crash’
• adjectives – ‘frightful’, ‘heaviest’, ‘spectacular’
• verbs – ‘cannonaded’, ‘tilted’, ‘dug in’, ‘disposed’
• alliteration – ‘fearful force’
• short sentences – ‘I sat up in my bed’, ‘It was six o'clock. I began to dress. I felt very much
annoyed.’
• adverbs – ‘drunkenly’, ‘refreshingly’, ‘primly’, ‘definitely’
• zoomorphism – ‘snorting steam’
• personification – ‘sprawled foolishly’, ‘defiant and naughty look’, ‘definitely conscious of indiscretion’
• metaphors – ‘cannonaded’, ‘dug in’, ‘little world’
• juxtaposition of ‘grotesque’ and ‘primly’
• hyperbole – ‘end of the world’, ‘broken both my legs’.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
13
0 4 For this question, you need to refer to the whole of Source A, together with the whole of
Source B.
Compare how the writers convey their different feelings and perspectives about their
experiences of travelling on a train.
In your answer, you could:
• compare their different feelings and perspectives
• comment on the methods the writers use to convey their feelings and perspectives
• support your response with references to both texts.
[16 marks]
AO3 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are conveyed,
across two or more texts.
Level Skills descriptors Indicative standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level.
It is not a model answer, nor a complete response, nor does it
seek to exemplify any particular content.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
comparison
13–16 marks
Compares ideas and
perspectives in a perceptive
way:
• analyses how writers’
methods are used
• selects a range of
judicious supporting detail
from both texts
• shows a detailed and
perceptive understanding
of the different ideas and
perspectives in both
texts.
The writer of Source A feels that his experience of
travelling by train has been something to be endured
and he cannot wait for his journey to conclude after
over a week of travel. His use of repetition and listing
of ‘no more’ in his first paragraph not only makes
clear how many aspects of the journey he disliked
but also reflects for the reader the monotony he has
felt on this trip. In complete contrast to the almost
contemptuous and weary feelings of the writer of
Source A, the writer of Source B is filled with
admiration and awe as she embraces the novelty of
train travel. She indicates this from the start of her
letter with the idea that ordinary writing paper is not
adequate to contain her ‘raptures’. Her use of
‘raptures’ has connotations of euphoria and an
almost spiritual experience. Here, the writer of
Source B establishes the idea of how out of this
world her trip was.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
14
Level 3
Clear, relevant
comparison
9–12 marks
Compares ideas and
perspectives in a clear and
relevant way:
• explains clearly how
writers’ methods are used
• selects relevant detail to
support from both texts
• shows a clear
understanding of the
different ideas and
perspectives in both
texts.
The writer of Source A feels that his experience of
train travel has been miserable and he is looking
forward to the end of his long journey. He uses
repetition and listing of ‘no more’ in his first
paragraph to highlight how many aspects of the
experience he cannot wait to leave behind, maybe
because he has been on this train for so long and
become bored. On the other hand, the writer in
Source B feels that her train ride has been
overwhelming and astonishing, which may link to this
being her first time on a train, unlike the more
experienced writer of Source A. Her delight in the
experience is clear at the start of her letter, where the
noun ‘raptures’ suggests she felt in a state of utter
joy on her journey. She has been amazed by her
experience because it is so extraordinary.
Level 2
Some attempts
at comparison
5–8 marks
Attempts to compare ideas
and perspectives:
• makes some comment on
how writers’ methods are
used
• selects some appropriate
textual detail/references,
not always supporting,
from one or both texts
• shows some
understanding of different
ideas and perspectives.
The writer of Source A feels that his experience of
travelling by train has been awful and he is fed up of
being on the train. At the start, he uses repetition and
listing of ‘no more’ to emphasise all the things he
doesn’t like about the train. On the other hand, the
writer in Source B has really enjoyed her train ride
and had a great time. She introduces her account
with the phrase ‘my raptures’ to make it clear that her
experience was very exciting. This shows that she is
more enthusiastic about her experience.
Level 1
Simple, limited
comment
1–4 marks
Makes simple cross
reference of ideas and
perspectives:
• makes simple
identification of writers’
methods
• selects simple
reference(s)/textual
detail(s) from one or both
texts
• shows simple awareness
of ideas and/or
perspectives.
The writer of Source A feels that his experience of
travelling by train is bad and he doesn’t like it. At the
start he repeats ‘no more’ and lists all the bad things
about the train journey. This is different from Source
B, where the writer feels good about her train ride.
She uses the phrase ‘my raptures’ to her friend at the
start of her letter. This shows that the writer has liked
her experience.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
15
Note
• If the quality of the response is Level 1 but only deals with one text, the maximum mark is 2.
• If the quality of the response is Level 2 but only deals with one text, the maximum mark is 6.
• A student has to deal with both texts to achieve Level 3 or above.
• References to the writers’ methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
AO3 content may include the comparison of feelings and perspectives such as:
• boredom/intrigue
• loathing/liking
• familiarity/novelty
• apathy/curiosity
• experience/innocence
• underwhelmed/overwhelmed
• contempt/admiration for the train.
and comment on methods such as:
• first-person accounts – though Source A is travel writing with a general, public and plural audience
and Source B is a private letter with a specific, singular audience
• chronological narrative structure of the end of the experience in Source A and the whole experience
in Source B
• shifts between action and reflection in both Source A and Source B
• climax of the train crash in Source A and the experience of the journey in Source B
• tone – sardonic/mocking but also dramatic in Source A; dramatic/excited but also explanatory
in Source B
• language features – personification in both Source A and B; listing in both Source A and B;
repetition in both Source A and Source B; use of full name of train in Source A, various animal
synonyms for engine in Source B
• audience – no direct reference to reader in Source A, direct address of letter recipient with second
person pronoun in Source B
• word choice.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
16
0 5 'Cars are convenient, comfortable and save time. However, we need to use them less by
making public transport such as trains, trams and buses cheaper, more reliable and easier to
access.'
Write a speech to be given at a meeting of your local council in which you argue your point of
view on this statement.
(24 marks for content and organisation
16 marks for technical accuracy)
[40 marks]GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
17
AO5 Content and organisation
Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and
audiences.
Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
Level Skills descriptors Typical features – rhetorical
This is not intended to be a checklist, but
an indication of the typical features often
included by candidates working at each
level
Level 4
Compelling,
convincing
communication
19–24 marks
Upper
Level 4
22–24
marks
Content
• Communication is convincing and compelling and directly relevant
to focus and task.
• Tone, style and register are assuredly matched to purpose and
audience.
• Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with sustained crafting of
linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Varied and inventive use of structural features.
• Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of convincing and
complex ideas.
• Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly integrated discourse
markers.
• Convincing argument.
• Conceptualised focus on task.
• Detailed/complex ideas.
• Fluid sequencing of ideas/
argument.
• Judicious choice of register.
• Confident and varied tone.
• Convincing and impressive
vocabulary.
• Deliberate crafting of language
and use of rhetorical devices.
• Subtle variation of pace.
Lower
Level 4
19–21
marks
Content
• Communication is convincing and directly relevant to focus and
task.
• Tone, style and register are convincingly matched to purpose and
audience.
• Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting of linguistic devices.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
18
Organisation
• Varied and effective structural features.
• Writing is highly engaging with a range of developed complex ideas.
• Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with integrated discourse
markers.
Level 3
Consistent,
clear
communication
13–18 mark
Upper
Level 3
16–18
marks
Content
• Communication is consistently clear and consistently relevant to
focus/task.
• Tone, style and register are consistently matched to purpose and
audience.
• Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and phrasing, chosen for
effect with a range of successful linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Effective use of structural features.
• Writing is engaging, using a range of clear, connected ideas.
• Coherent paragraphs with integrated discourse markers.
• Clear point of view/argument
established.
• Clear and relevant focus on the
task.
• Clearly developed range of
ideas.
• Clear and logical sequencing of
ideas/argument.
• Appropriate level of formality.
• Sustained and effective tone.
• Accurate range of vocabulary
chosen for effect.
• Effective use of rhetorical
devices.
• Controlled pace.
Lower
Level 3
13–15
marks
Content
• Communication is generally clear and relevant to focus/task.
• Tone, style and register are generally matched to purpose and
audience.
• Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and appropriate use of
linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Usually effective use of structural features.
• Writing is engaging, with a range of connected ideas.
• Usually coherent paragraphs with range of discourse markers.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
19
Level 2
Some
successful
communication
7–12 marks
Upper
Level 2
10–12
marks
Content
• Communicates with some sustained success and sustained
relevance to focus/task.
• Some sustained attempt to match tone, style and register to
purpose and audience.
• Conscious use of vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Some use of structural features.
• Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas.
• Some use of paragraphs and some use of discourse markers.
• Attempts to establish point of
view/argument.
• Some focus on task.
• Attempts to develop ideas.
• Some sequencing of ideas.
• Some relevant register/
formality.
• Attempts to establish tone.
• Some attempt to select
vocabulary.
• Some use of rhetorical devices.
• Some attempt to create pace.
Lower
Level 2
7–9
marks
Content
• Communicates with some success and some relevance to
focus/task.
• Attempts to match tone, style and register to purpose and audience.
• Attempts to vary vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Attempts to use structural features.
• Some linked and relevant ideas.
• Attempt to write in paragraphs with some discourse markers, not
always appropriate.GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
20
Level 1
Simple, limited
communication
1–6 marks
Upper
Level 1
4–6
marks
Content
• Communicates simply with simple relevance to focus/task.
• Simple awareness of matching tone, style and register to purpose
and audience.
• Simple vocabulary; simple linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Evidence of simple structural features.
• One or two relevant ideas, simply linked.
• Random paragraph structure.
• Simple or limited point of view.
• Limited focus on task.
• Limited scope/ideas.
• Simple sequence of ideas.
• Simple register.
• Simple tone.
• Simple/limited vocabulary.
• Simple use of devices.
• Limited sense of pace.
Lower
Level 1
1–3
marks
Content
• Limited communication with limited relevance to focus/task.
• Occasional sense of matching tone, style and register to purpose
and audience.
• Simple vocabulary.
Organisation
• Limited or no evidence of structural features.
• One or two unlinked ideas.
• No paragraphs.
Level 0
No marks
Students will not have offered any meaningful writing to assess.
Nothing to reward.
NB – If a candidate does not directly address the focus of the task, their communication cannot be clear or convincing and therefore the mark
for AO5 is capped at the top of Level 2 - 12 marksGCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 –SAMPLE MARK SCHEME
21
AO6 Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose
and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation.
(This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification as a whole.)
Technical Accuracy
Level Skills descriptors
Level 4
13–16 marks
• Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate.
• Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy.
• Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect.
• Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
complex grammatical structures.
• High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary.
• Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary.
Level 3
9–12 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate.
• Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success.
• Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect.
• Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
structures.
• Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words.
• Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary.
Level 2
5–8 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate.
• Some control of a range of punctuation.
• Attempts a variety of sentence forms.
• Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement.
• Some accurate spelling of more complex words.
• Varied use of vocabulary.
Level 1
1–4 marks
• Occasional use of sentence demarcation.
• Some evidence of conscious punctuation.
• Simple range of sentence forms.
• Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement.
• Accurate basic spelling.
• Simple use of vocabulary.
Level 0
No marks
Students’ spelling, punctuation etc. is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding
or meaning.