English
Language
Answers and commentaries
GCSE (8700)
Paper 1: Explorations in creative reading and writing
(from 2026)

Marked answers to exemplify the updated questions for first exam
in 2026. Supporting commentary is provided to help you
understand how marks are awarded and how students can
improve performance.




Version 1.2
November 2025
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Contents
The below content table is interactive. You can click on the title of the question to go directly
to that page.


                                                                                     Page

 Question 1                                                                          3

 Question 3                                                                          8

 Question 4                                                                          15

 Question 5                                                                          21




© 2025 AQA                                                                                2 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Answers and commentaries
    Please note that these responses have been produced by a senior examiner and are not
    from an exam series, therefore they have not been through the usual exam
    standardisation process. This resource is intended to illustrate possible student answers
    and generate discussion rather than to indicate a standard for a future exam. As they have
    been created to represent a student responding in exam conditions, some errors in
    spelling and punctuation are present.

    This resource is to be used alongside the GCSE English Language updated Sample
    assessment materials for first exam in 2026 Paper 1 Question paper and inserts.



Question 1
This question covers AO1 'Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas '.
Now a multiple-choice question (MCQ), learners need to read the given lines and answer the
four questions.

Question
Read again the first part of the source, from lines 1 to 9.

Answer all parts of this question.

•     Shade the circles in the boxes of the one that you think is correct.
•     Choose a maximum of one answer for each question.
•     If you make an error cross out the whole box.
•     If you change your mind and require a statement that has been crossed out then draw
      a circle around the box.

                                                                                          [4 marks]
Mark scheme
    AO1      • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
             • Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
    This assesses bullet point 1: identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and
    ideas
    Question                                      Answer                                    Mark
    What worries Pi about the hyena?              Remembering what his father told him             1
                                                  about hyenas
    How do hyenas usually attack?                 As a group                                       1

    What sort of attackers are hyenas?            Tough                                            1

    What does Pi hope will distract the hyena     The other animals on the boat                    1
    away from him?

© 2025 AQA                                                                               3 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Student responses

Response A

0   1   . 1   What worries Pi about the hyena?


               Its appearance


               Remembering what his father told him about hyenas


               The noise it is making



0   1   . 2   How do hyenas usually attack?


               On their own


               In a pair


               As a group



0   1   . 3   What sort of attackers are hyenas?


               Tough


               Vulnerable


               Reluctant



0   1   . 4   What does Pi hope will distract the hyena away from him?


               Its mother


               The other animals on the boat


               The horizon




© 2025 AQA                                                               4 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 This response would score 1 out of 4 marks.

 1.1 The response here selects an answer from outside of the stated lines, as the
     appearance of hyenas is not introduced until the third paragraph. The answer therefore
     scores 0 marks.
 1.2 This answer is correct. The response correctly identifies the word ‘group’ as a synonym
     for ‘pack’ and therefore scores 1 mark.
 1.3 The correct response is ‘tough’. It is possible that the word ‘hardy’ has been
     misunderstood or misread as ‘hardly’ with the response being ‘reluctant’. This response
     therefore scores 0 marks.
 1.4 This question requires careful reading; although ‘mothers’ are mentioned in the text,
     along with the idea of being ‘distracted’, the text and/or question has been
     misread/misunderstood. It is the ‘other animals on the boat’ that Pi hopes will distract
     the hyena, so the given response is incorrect and scores 0 marks.




© 2025 AQA                                                                         5 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Response B

0   1   . 1   What worries Pi about the hyena?


               Its appearance


               Remembering what his father told him about hyenas


               The noise it is making


0   1   . 2   How do hyenas usually attack?


               On their own


               In a pair


               As a group


0   1   . 3   What sort of attackers are hyenas?


               Tough


               Vulnerable


               Reluctant


0   1   . 4   What does Pi hope will distract the hyena away from him?


               Its mother


               The other animals on the boat


               The horizon




© 2025 AQA                                                               6 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026



 This response would score 4 out of 4 marks.

 1.1 This answer is correct. The response identifies that the second sentence states that Pi
     had ‘not forgotten Father’s words’ and made the correct connection with the second
     response, which states that it is ‘[r]emembering what his father told him…’ that worries
     Pi. The response therefore scores 1 mark.
 1.2 This response is correct. The word ‘group’ is correctly identified as a synonym for ‘pack’
     and therefore scores 1 mark.
 1.3 This response is correct. The response shows understanding of ‘hardy’ as a synonym
     for ‘tough’ and selects the correct answer, therefore scoring 1 mark.
 1.4 This response is correct. It locates the correct mention of a distraction on line 8 and
     shows understanding that this answer fulfils the demands of the question. It therefore
     scores 1 mark.




© 2025 AQA                                                                            7 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Question 3
This question covers AO2 and the use of structural features to achieve effects. The question
now offers learners a specific effect to help focus their responses and provides extra guidance
in the bullet points by giving generic structural features that could be commented on.


Question
You now need to think about the structure of the source as a whole.

This text is from the middle of a novel.

How has the writer structured the text to create tension?

You could write about:
   • how tension has increased or decreased by the end of the source
   • how the writer uses structure to create an effect
   • the writer’s use of any other structural features, such as changes in mood, tone or
      perspective.
                                                                                        [8 marks]


Mark scheme
 AO2
 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
 influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views

 This question assesses structure: i.e. structural features such as a pivotal point, juxtaposition,
 flash back, shifts in focus, mood or tone, contrast, narrative pace and/or other structural features

 Level              Skills descriptors            Indicative standard
                                                  This indicative standard is not a model answer,
                                                  nor a complete response. Nor does it seek to
                                                  exemplify any particular content. Rather, it is an
                                                  indication of the standard for the level.

 Level 4            Shows perceptive and          The structure of the first half of the source
 Perceptive,        detailed understanding of     establishes the unequal power dynamic between
 detailed           structural features:          the narrator and the hyena. The first sentence
 analysis           • Analyses the effects of     immediately introduces the narrator’s concern, ‘it
                       the writer’s choices of    was the hyena that worried me’ and this
 7–8 marks             structural features        foreshadows the pivotal point of the extract: Pi
                    • Selects a range of          passively watching the hyena’s wild, noisy
                       judicious examples         behaviour. However, instead of moving straight
                    • Makes sophisticated         to the rising action, the writer includes some
                       and accurate use of        detailed description of the hyena, including
                       subject terminology        ominous details about its ability to hunt. By
                                                  building the tension in this way, it makes us
                                                  share Pi’s terror when the hyena actually
                                                  appears, especially as we are sharing Pi’s first-
                                                  person perspective.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                 8 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


                   Shows clear                     Although there is little action in the first half of
                   understanding of structural     the source, the writer deliberately mentions the
                   features:                       hyena right at the start to foreshadow the
                   • Explains clearly the          incident that follows. By saying ‘It was the hyena
                     effects of the writer’s       that worried me’, the writer immediately
                     choices of structural         introduces the main element of tension in the
                     features                      source. The pivotal point occurs when the hyena
                   • Selects a range of            suddenly comes out and begins running in
                     relevant examples             circles, bringing Pi’s fears to life. By describing
                   • Makes clear and               the hyena’s erratic movements and going into
                     accurate use of subject       lots of background detail about it, the reader
                     terminology                   anticipates the hyena’s threatening behaviour.

 Level 2           Shows some                      The writer spends a long time focusing on the
 Some              understanding of structural     hyena at the start of the source. By introducing
 understanding     features:                       in the first sentence that ‘it was the hyena that
 and comment       • Attempts to comment on        worried me’, it foreshadows the scary behaviour
                     the effect of structural      of the hyena. The key moment, when the hyena
 3–4 marks           features                      comes out and starts running in circles, builds
                   • Selects some                  tension as we start to realise why Pi might be so
                     appropriate examples          concerned about the hyena and what it might do
                   • Makes some use of             next.
                     subject terminology,
                     mainly appropriately

 Level 1           Shows simple awareness          The writer focuses on the hyena at the start of
 Simple, limited   of structural features:         the source. The hyena is mentioned in the first
 comment           • Offers simple comment         sentence when it says ‘it was the hyena that
                      on the effect of structure   worried me’. This makes us wonder why he is so
 1–2 marks         • Selects simple                worried and creates tension as we think about
                      reference(s) or              what will happen next, especially as we don’t
                      example(s)                   know where the hyena is or what it is doing.
                   • Makes simple use of           Then we get a lot of description about hyenas so
                      subject terminology, not     that we can picture it in our mind.
                      always appropriately

 Level 0           Nothing to reward
 No marks


AO2 content may include the effect of structural features such as:

• exposition: background information about hyenas to allow the reader to appreciate the
  danger Pi could be in
• foreshadowing: early references to Pi’s fear of the hyena, foreshadowing the incident that
  follows
• pivotal point: sudden appearance and erratic behaviour of the hyena after Pi’s description of
  its hunting ability
• focus shifts: movement from action to description, including detailed portrayal of the hyena
  to emphasise its hideous appearance and unpredictable nature
• first person perspective: the reader shares Pi’s thoughts and feelings and sees the hyena’s
  appearance and behaviour (perhaps unreliably) through his eyes


© 2025 AQA                                                                                  9 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


• motifs: repeated reference to the hyena’s ‘typical’ behaviour to emphasise its unchanging
  nature, or references to the horizon to represent the (perhaps fading) hope of the narrator
• rising action: increase of tension and pace as the hyena’s wild behaviour escalates
• juxtaposition: description of the vicious nature of the hyena contrasted with its behaviour and
  ultimate vulnerability at the end of the extract
• anti-climax: sudden ending undercuts the previous threat of the hyena, releasing tension as
  the hyena unexpectedly stops its wild behaviour.




© 2025 AQA                                                                               10 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Student responses

Response A
The writer opens the text with an immediate sense that Pi is uncomfortable and worried by
the situation with the statement, ‘it was the hyena that worried me.’ This immediately causes
tension because the reader understands that there is a threat to Pi, and by the second
paragraph we understand that the hyena is close enough to hear ‘whining’ and is therefore a
close and direct threat, thus heightening the already established tension of the opening line.

As the extract develops, the focus shifts to a detailed description of the hyena, which is given
as an altogether unattractive picture. Although some may see this description of the hyena as
comical, it is evident that the hyena is also a threatening animal, for the writer describes how
its ears could have been ‘torn off in battle.’ The introduction of this description serves to
reinforce and increase the tension of the opening paragraphs and seamlessly leads the
reader into the inevitable interaction with the hyena. By this point, the reader is anticipating a
dangerous and possibly bloody outcome for Pi, who ‘prepared for’ his ‘end’, and the tension in
the extract is at its peak. Both here and in the rest of the extract, the writer’s use of the first-
person perspective enhances the tension as our connection to Pi grows and our disgust for
the hyena also increases.
By the end of the extract, the tension has dispersed as the writer creates a shift in tone from
one of threat to one of comic relief. Rather than seeing Pi meet his ‘end’, the reader may
experience relief and even a moment of humour as the hyena stops ‘running in circles’ and
collapses in a heap of its own vomit. The writer returns to the hyena’s whining, but whereas
earlier it appeared to be preparing to attack with desperate hunger, now at the end, it is
reduced to a pitiable creature and its dramatic humiliation introduces unexpected humour.




© 2025 AQA                                                                               11 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 This is a Level 4 response

 This is an effective response to the new style of question, with frequent and accurate
 references to the focus (in this case, tension). The response consistently addresses how the
 writer structures the text to build and release tension, demonstrating a perceptive and
 detailed understanding of the passage.

 The response shows analytical skills by explaining how the writer’s structural choices shape
 the reader’s experience. For example, the analysis of the opening line, ‘it was the hyena
 that worried me,’ effectively explains how this immediately establishes tension and sets the
 tone for the extract. The response also tracks the development of tension, showing an
 awareness of how the structure moves from worry, to heightened fear, and eventually to
 comic relief: ‘The writer returns to the hyena’s whining, but where earlier it appeared to be
 preparing to attack with desperate hunger, now at the end, it is reduced to a pitiable
 creature and its dramatic reduction and humiliation introduce unexpected humour.’

 There is a sense that the whole extract has been understood, and the response
 demonstrates awareness of why the writer introduces key ideas or images at specific
 moments. A particularly strong point is the discussion of the hyena’s description, which
 reinforces tension and primes the reader for a dramatic confrontation. The explanation of
 the shift in tone towards the end of the extract is also perceptive, showing an
 understanding of how the writer plays with reader expectations to create a sense of relief
 after sustained tension.

 The response is well-supported with effective examples, and subject terminology is used
 accurately and appropriately. The response demonstrates sophisticated understanding of
 how narrative choices impact the reader’s emotions. The integration of terminology is
 seamless and reinforces the depth of analysis.

 Overall, this response meets the criteria for a high-level answer due to its perceptive
 analysis of structure, its effective use of evidence and its confident use of subject
 terminology.




© 2025 AQA                                                                            12 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Response B
The text is taken from the middle of a novel, so the readers will already have a connection to
Pi by this point and therefore feel worried for him when he says that he is ‘worried’ by the
hyena. This foreshadows the danger that Pi faces and increases the tension that the reader
will feel for the rest of the extract. The tension is high from the start because the reader feels
Pi’s fear from the information that he received from his father and therefore the threat is
foregrounded as Pi being powerless

The focus shifts away from Pi and his fears and memories to the hyena running ‘around the
zebra in a circle’ and it continues to run for some time, as the writer describes how it goes for
‘lap after lap’. This shows that the hyena is still a potential threat because Pi is ‘seized by fear’
and the writer also describes how it was ‘hair raising’ and that Pi ‘tensed’ each time it ‘came
from the stern’. The tension for the reader is at peak levels at this point because we still do
not know whether Pi will survive the ordeal. The hyena running round the boat makes the
boat sway, reminding the reader of its size and strength that was described at the start. The
erratic laps and the hyena’s clicking claws heighten its closeness to Pi and the tense
anticipation that it could attack with speed and force at any moment.

By the end of the extract the hyena has collapsed, possibly with exhaustion, and it is clear that
the threat is over so there is an immediate sense of anti-climax. The sudden humiliation of
the hyena creates humour as this ‘hardy attacker’ is actually terrified.


 This is a Level 3 response

 This is a clear response to the new style of question and can be awarded a Level 3 mark.
 The response makes consistent reference to the focus of the question (tension) and
 provides clear explanations of how structural features contribute to this effect.

 The response effectively tracks the progression of tension throughout the extract,
 beginning with Pi’s initial fear of the hyena, moving through the description of the hyena’s
 erratic movement and concluding with the reduction of tension and sense of anti-climax as
 the hyena collapses. This structured approach ensures that the response engages with the
 whole text, demonstrating a clear understanding of how tension fluctuates.

 There is a range of relevant examples, such as the analysis of the phrase ‘seized by fear,’
 which reinforces Pi’s vulnerability and highlights the heightening tension. The discussion of
 the repetition in ‘lap after lap’ effectively explains how the structure sustains the reader’s
 anticipation. While the final part of the response is less developed, it still acknowledges the
 shift in tone at the end of the passage.

 The response also makes clear and accurate use of subject terminology, referring
 appropriately to foreshadowing and shifts in focus.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                13 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Response C
Pi is frightened by the hyena right at the start because the hyena is scary, so the writer makes
tenson in the extract. Then the hyena runs in circles and this is scary too.
We wonder what the hyena will do next, like will pi be killed?

So when the hyena is running around in circles which is frightening for Pi so the reader is
worried again which means that there must be tension.


 This is a Level 1 response

 This is a simple response to the task, demonstrating a simple awareness of structural
 features but without fully explaining their effects. The comments are simple, showing
 limited understanding of how structural features affect the reader.

 The response acknowledges the presence of tension in the extract but does not explore
 how the writer's choices contribute to this effect. For example, the mention of Pi being
 frightened by the hyena at the start correctly identifies a moment of tension, but there is
 no further discussion of how the writer builds or sustains this tension.

 The response does reference a structural shift when the hyena is running in circles, but this
 is presented as a simple observation rather than an analysis of how or why the
 introduction of this idea affects the reader.

 Due to the lack of explanation and development, this remains a Level 1 response.
 To improve, the response needs to show understanding that is more precise than a simple
 synonym for ‘worried.’ There could be more comment on how events and feelings change
 across the text selecting references and structural phrases that show the development
 across the text




© 2025 AQA                                                                           14 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026




Question 4
This question covers AO4 and the skill of evaluation. The reference to a student making the
statement has been removed for June 2026 onwards, and learners are encouraged to
respond to the statement critically, supporting their judgements with analysis of method and
careful references to the text within the given lines. The bullet points offer areas of focus to
help learners structure an effective response.


Question
For this question focus on the second part of the source, from line 20 to the end.

In this part of the source, where the hyena comes out from under the tarpaulin, it could be seen as
funny rather than threatening. The writer suggests that the hyena is actually no serious threat to
Pi.

To what extent do you agree and/or disagree with this statement?

In your response, you could:
   • consider your impressions of how the hyena behaves
   • comment on the methods the writer uses to present the hyena
   • support your response with references to the text.


                                                                                     [20 marks]




© 2025 AQA                                                                              15 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Mark scheme
 AO4
 Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references

 Level           Skills descriptors              Indicative standard
                                                 This indicative standard is not a model answer,
                                                 nor a complete response. Nor does it seek to
                                                 exemplify any particular content. Rather, it is an
                                                 indication of the standard for the level.

 Level 4         Shows perceptive and            It would be easy to initially see the hyena’s wild
 Perceptive,     detailed evaluation:            behaviour as frightening but when you look at
 detailed        • Develops a convincing         how it is described then it is definitely more
 evaluation        and critical understanding    amusing. The way that it ‘ran in circles’ would be
                   of ideas                      intimidating if it was circling its prey, but in fact it
 16–20 marks     • Shows perceptive              is just making itself increasingly sick and
                   understanding of writer’s     confused, despite Pi remaining frozen with fear.
                   methods                       The writer uses the repeated circular motion as a
                 • Evaluates critically and in   symbol for the hyena’s pointless behaviour, as if
                   detail the impact of the      it does not have a clue what it is doing. This is
                   writer’s ideas and            made even more ridiculous by the repetition of
                   methods on the reader         the onomatopoeic ‘yip’ noise that the animal
                 • Selects a range of            makes. While this going on ‘all morning’ would
                   judicious textual detail      certainly be annoying, it is hardly the noise of a
                                                 ferocious predator and the more you say the
                                                 sound the more trivial it actually becomes. The
                                                 repetitive nature of both movement and sound
                                                 emphasises to the reader the bizarre
                                                 performance that Pi is forced to endure until the
                                                 sudden anti-climax removes any remaining
                                                 sense of a threat altogether.

 Level 3         Shows clear and relevant        While Pi is understandably frightened of the
 Clear,          evaluation:                     hyena, it soon becomes clear that its behaviour
 relevant        • Makes a clear and             is more amusing than threatening. It says ‘All
 evaluation        relevant understanding of     morning the hyena ran in circles going yip yip yip
                   ideas                         yip yip’. This pattern of circling might remind the
 11–15 marks     • Shows clear                   reader of a predator circling its prey but in fact
                   understanding of writer’s     doing laps of the boat is all that the hyena does,
                   methods                       so it soon stops being frightening. While the
                 • Evaluates clearly the         writer’s repetition of the onomatopoeic ‘yip’
                   impact of the writer’s        sound makes the hyena seem relentless, it is
                   ideas and methods on the      more of an amusing sound than it is a terrifying
                   reader                        one and it is perhaps more the fact that it goes
                 • Selects a range of            on ‘all morning’ that wears Pi down. The longer
                   relevant textual              this repeated movement and sound goes on, the
                   references                    less of a surprise it is to us when the hyena
                                                 suddenly collapses and the threat disappears.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                     16 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 Level 2         Shows some attempts at         Pi is clearly frightened of the hyena up until the
 Some,           evaluation:                    very end of the extract but a lot of the things that
 evaluation      • Shows some                   the hyena does are actually quite funny. It says
                   understanding of ideas       ‘All morning the hyena ran in circles going yip yip
 6–10 marks      • Shows some                   yip yip yip’.. The writer has repeated the ‘yip’
                   understanding of writer’s    sound so that we can see annoying it would be
                   methods                      for it stops suddenly at the end of the extract
                 • Makes some evaluative        when the hyena just gives up.
                   comment(s) on the
                   impact of the writer’s
                   methods and ideas on the
                   reader
                 • Selects some appropriate
                   textual reference(s)


 Level 1         Shows simple, limited           ‘All morning the hyena ran in circles going yip
 Simple,         evaluation:                    yip yip yip yip’… The writer uses the sounds of
 limited         • Shows simple, limited        the animal so that the reader can imagine what it
 comment           understanding of ideas       is doing and the noise it is making. You could
                 • Shows limited                definitely see why an animal behaving like this
 1–5 marks         understanding of writer’s    would be funny to watch
                   methods
                 • Makes simple, limited
                   evaluative comment(s) on
                   the impact of the writer’s
                   methods and ideas on the
                   reader
                 • Selects simple, limited
                   textual reference(s)


 Level 0         Nothing to reward.
 No marks


Note: Reference to the writer’s methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
Similarly, the evaluative ‘I do/I don’t agree’ may be implicit.
In both these cases credit should be given according to the quality of what is written.
AO4 content may include the evaluation of ideas and methods such as:

• Pi’s wariness of the hyena, shown through a first-person perspective and presented by his
  thoughts, feelings and actions, ‘seized with fear’, although these thoughts could be seen as
  unreliable
• description of the hyena running, with dynamic verbs such as ‘beating’, ‘clicking’ and
  ‘racing’ to emphasise its speed and strength, especially alongside threatening references
  such as ‘maniacal beast’
• the increasing tension of the section, emphasised by the use of short sentences, ‘I
  prepared for my end’ to enhance the danger of the situation, although this could be seen as
  hyperbole
• the repeated ‘circling’ of the hyena, showing a sustained threat and symbolising Pi’s
  feelings of fear and entrapment, although it could also show the ridiculousness of the
  hyena’s behaviour

© 2025 AQA                                                                                17 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


• the use of sounds, including the repeated ‘yip’, to reflect the relentless nature of the
  hyena’s behaviour, although this could be seen as more humorous than threatening
• the contrast of the ‘horizon’ representing a ‘salvation’ that Pi is at risk of losing if the hyena
  kills him
• the sudden, anti-climactic ending, where the hyena suddenly and comically collapses,
  reveals Pi’s over-reaction to its threat.


Student responses

Response A
In the extract, Martel presents the hyena as both threatening and comical. I partitially
disagree with the statement, that the hyena could be seen as funny ‘or’ frightening, because I
think that there is enough evidence to support both of these possibilities; the hyena is both
funny and frightening. It’s unpredictable and erratic behaviour creates an unsettling
atmosphere, yet there are also absurd and almost ridiculous elements to its actions. The
contrast between these two interpretations highlights the author’s blend of tension with dark
humour, leaving the reader both wary and amused by the animal’s antics. Therefore, it is
possible to evaluate the hyena as being funny, despite the obvious threat to Pi.

Structurally, the hyena’s behaviour in the extract initially evokes fear – the threat is there from
its first introduction and in the second half of the extract, its sudden movement as it ‘leapt
over the zebra’ and ‘onto the stern bench’ creates a sense of unpredictability. The verb ‘leapt’
suggests an aggressive and uncontrolled energy, making the hyena appear dangerous.
Furthermore, Pi’s reaction, ‘I was seized by fear and could only watch’, reinforces this sense of
threat. The fact that Pi is frozen, unable to act, mirrors the reader’s own apprehension. The
idea that the hyena might attack at any moment keeps both Pi and the reader on edge, giving
the impression that the hyena is a force to be feared.

The writer also uses repetition to emphasise the hyena’s relentless energy. The description of
its movement, ’one lap-two-three-four-five-and onwards, non-stop, till I lost count’, portrays
the animal as tireless and almost mechanical. This rapid, ceaseless motion makes the hyena
seem manic and difficult to predict, which heightens the sense of unease. The phrase ‘till I lost
count’ suggests that Pi, and by extension the reader, is overwhelmed by the sheer length of
time the hyena spends running in circles. This exaggerated behaviour contributes to the
animal’s unsettling presence, and heightens the danger posed by the hyena - with which Pi is
trapped on a boat.

However, there is also an undeniably humorous aspect to the hyena’s behaviour. Its repetitive
running—likened to an ‘indoor track’—transforms what should be a menacing display into
something absurd. The image of a hyena mindlessly and childishly circling a lifeboat for an
extended period is more comical than threatening. Additionally, the repeated high-pitched ‘yip
yip yip yip yip’ noise diminishes the hyena’s ferocity. Martel’s use of onomatopoeia captures
the almost cartoonish nature of the sound, making it seem more irritating than menacing.
Instead of the deep growls one might associate with a predator, the hyena emits a sound
reminiscent of a small, excitable dog, which lessens the reader’s fear.



© 2025 AQA                                                                                    18 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Pi’s own perception of the hyena also influences the reader’s response. He describes its
expression as ‘blank and frank, jaw hanging open, big ears sticking up rigidly, eyes bright and
black.’ The detailed description, with its emphasis on the hyena’s awkward appearance, makes
it seem less like a ruthless killer and more like a confused and somewhat foolish creature. The
phrase ‘jaw hanging open’ suggests mindlessness rather than calculation, while the rigid ears
and bright eyes make the hyena appear more bewildered than menacing. This almost comical
depiction further complicates the reader’s response, making it difficult to see the hyena as a
purely terrifying presence.

As the passage progresses, the hyena’s behaviour takes a more pitiful turn. After running in
circles for an extended period, it finally stops, producing ‘deep groans interrupted by fits of
heavy panting.’ This shift from manic energy to exhaustion makes the hyena seem weak and
pathetic rather than threatening. The final image of the animal vomiting and then lying in its
own sickness, ’exploring the furthest confines of animal anguish’, elicits a sense of discomfort
but also pity. The phrase ‘animal anguish’ suggests suffering rather than malice, further
reducing any lingering perception of the hyena as a serious threat. Instead, it seems like a
creature overwhelmed by its own fear and confusion. The contrast between the initial tension
and the eventual pathetic state of the animal creates a darkly humorous effect. In conclusion,
the hyena in this passage is both threatening and amusing.


 This is a Level 4 response

 This is a convincing and critical response to the question. It demonstrates a convincing
 understanding of the text and offers a nuanced and critical response to the question; there
 is a sense of a full appreciation of the task. The response suggests that it is not a case of
 ‘either or’ in their evaluation of the hyena but presents a critical argument that both ideas
 could be valid. Other Level 4 responses may succeed equally well by exploring only one
 element of the statement.

 There is a critical evaluation of the writer’s ideas throughout the response, which is also
 supported throughout with a judicious selection of textual detail. The understanding of
 methods is perceptive and is presented to demonstrate thorough appreciation of the
 choices made by the writer to bring about specific effects, which in turn are used to
 support the argument that the hyena is both threatening and funny. In this response, the
 bullet points have been effectively addressed; there is a detailed focus on the concepts of
 humour and fear. While this answer is methods-led, Level 4 is achieved through the quality
 of the evaluation first and foremost.

 This response demonstrates an effective use of the bullet points as guidance to help focus
 the response. Using the bullet points as a scaffold for structuring the answer may not
 benefit all students, however.




© 2025 AQA                                                                           19 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Response B
I agree with the statement that the hyena could be perceived as funny or threatening but
overall I think the hyena is a threat. It is not funny to be trapped on a boat with a killer animal
who’s behaviour makes it frightening. Its behaviour might seem weird but this does not
make it funny. It just shows that the animal is unpredictable and that Pi should be frightened.
We do not know if Pi is going to survive and there is nothing funny about that.

At the start the hyena is frightening and its behaviour is strange. It is whining which makes it
sound afraid. Pi is also afraid so we think the hyena is a threat. From the beginning, Pi is
worried about the hyena and this carries on, so I think the hyena could be dangerous. This
weird behaviour suggests confusion, but also it’s really unpredictable, so the reader
understands that it’s a threat. The phrase ‘whimpering and hesitating’ might make us feel
sorry for the hyena at first, but then again later it is more frightening. Pi says , ‘I was seized
by fear and could only watch.’ The fact that he is frozen shows he feels the danger, he is just
standing there, trapped with a wild animal that could attack him at any moment.

Also, the hyena keeps running around which makes it sounds frightening. Pi describes how it
‘ran around the zebra in a circle’ and continued ‘non-stop, till I lost count.’ This maybe shows
that the hyena is stressed out and therefore the hyena could strike. It is moving ‘non-stop’
which shows the hyena has lots of energy, making it seem even more dangerous.

By the end of the passage, the hyena remains a threat even though it has laid down collapsing
exhausted in its own sick. It is making ‘deep groans’. This may show it is hurt or in pain or
maybe the hyena has just had enough. The writer uses the phrase ‘deep groans’ to suggest
that it is not just suffering but also frustrated. The hyena may be confused to be on a boat. At
the end the threat is still there even if the hyena is lying down groaning soI still don’t find it
funny and I don’t think pi does neither.


 This is a Level 2 response

 This answer keeps a focus on the question and responds well to the bullet points; there are
 attempts to comment on the statement throughout the response and there is some
 understanding of the ideas throughout the response too. The response engages with the
 methods employed by the writer, although the comments on this are not yet specific
 enough to be awarded Level 3.

 Some appropriate references are chosen to support the response. There is use of
 appropriate detail to support ideas and the response often engages with this in attempts to
 comment on the methods too. The response argues that the hyena is frightening and not
 at all funny; this has worked well in this instance as the response has been kept on track
 with one focus. There is some light-touch reference to the idea that the hyena could not
 possibly be seen as funny, which also works well to reinforce this answer’s argument.



© 2025 AQA                                                                                20 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


Question 5
This question focuses on AO5 and AO6. A prompt has been added to the descriptive question
that a learner can use their own imagination and do not need to describe the provided image
in their response. The narrative question has been updated to state that learners should write
the opening of a story rather than construct a full narrative.

Question
A wildlife magazine is running a creative writing competition. Choose one of the options below for
your entry.

Either

Write a description of a zoo or wildlife park from your imagination. You may choose to use the
picture provided for ideas.

or

Write the opening of a story about a human meeting an animal.

                                                         (24 marks for content and organisation
                                                               16 marks for technical accuracy)

                                                                                        [40 marks]




© 2025 AQA                                                                              21 of 32
                              GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS: FIRST EXAM 2026

Mark scheme
AO5 Content and organisation
Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support coherence and cohesion of texts.

Level                              Skills descriptors                                  Typical features –             Typical features – narrative
                                                                                       descriptive writing

                                                                                       This is not intended to be a checklist, but an indication of the
                                                                                       typical features often included by candidates working at
                                                                                       each level

Level 4               Upper        Content                                             •   Distinctive and original   •   Distinctive and original
Compelling,           Level 4      • Communication is convincing and compelling            imagery.                       narrative perspective.
convincing                           and directly relevant to focus and task           •   Compelling and             •   Convincing character/s.
communication         22–24                                                                evocative description.     •   Impressive vocabulary,
                                   • Tone, style and register are assuredly
19–24 marks           marks
                                     matched to purpose and audience                   •   Impressive vocabulary          used judiciously.
                                                                                           used judiciously.          •   Detailed and convincing
                                   • Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with           •   Conceptualized
                                     sustained crafting of linguistic devices                                             setting.
                                                                                           ideas developed well.
                                   Organisation                                                                       •   Conceptualized ideas.
                                                                                       •   Subtle detail and
                                                                                           ideas.                     •   Convincing sequence of
                                   • Varied and inventive use of structural features
                                                                                                                          events, skilful temporal and
                                   • Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of   •   Compelling use of
                                                                                           linguistic devices and         spatial shifts.
                                     convincing and complex ideas                                                     •   Impressive control of
                                                                                           impressive control of
                                   • Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly            phrasing.                      phrasing.
                                     integrated discourse markers                      •   Fluid sequence of          •   Subtle and skilful shifts in
                                                                                           ideas.                         mood/ atmosphere.
                      Lower        Content                                                                            •   Crafted style.
                      Level 4                                                          •   Highly successful
                                   • Communication is convincing and directly              control of mood/
                                     relevant to focus and task                            atmosphere.
                      19–21
                                   • Tone, style and register are convincingly         •   Crafted style.
                      marks
                                     matched to purpose and audience
                                   • Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting
                                     of linguistic devices

© 2025 AQA                                                                                                                               22 of 32
                             GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS: FIRST EXAM 2026


                                 Organisation
                                 • Varied and effective structural features
                                 • Writing is highly engaging with a range of
                                   developed complex ideas
                                 • Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with
                                   integrated discourse markers

 Level 3             Upper       Content                                          •   Effective imagery.       •   Clear narrative perspective.
 Consistent, clear   Level 3     • Communication is consistently clear and        •   Clear description that   •   Develops characters
 communication                     consistently relevant to focus/task                explores details.            effectively.
 13–18 marks         16–18       • Tone, style and register are clearly and
                                                                                  •   Precise and well-        •   Precise and well-chosen
                     marks                                                            chosen vocabulary.           vocabulary.
                                   consistently matched to purpose and
                                                                                  •   A range of details       •   Establishes setting with
                                   audience
                                                                                      described.                   clear details.
                                 • Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and      •   Developed theme/s        •   Shapes and controls a
                                   phrasing, chosen for effect with a range of        and ideas.                   sequence of events.
                                   successful linguistic devices                  •   Controlled use of        •   Uses temporal and spatial
                                 Organisation                                         vocabulary and               shifts with success.
                                 • Effective use of structural features               linguistic devices.      •   Clearly establishes plot.
                                 • Writing is engaging, using a range of clear,   •   Clearly shaped           •   Controls the pace and ideas
                                   connected ideas                                    sequence of                  within the narrative.
                                                                                      ideas/images.            •   Creates and maintains a
                                 • Coherent paragraphs with integrated            •   Creates clear mood/          specific mood/ atmosphere.
                                   discourse markers                                  atmosphere.              •   Clear and controlled use of
                                                                                  •   Clear and controlled         style.
                     Lower       Content
                                                                                      use of style.
                     Level 3     • Communication is generally clear and
                                   relevant to focus/task
                     13–15
                                 • Tone, style and register are generally
                     marks
                                   matched to purpose and audience
                                 • Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and
                                   appropriate use of linguistic devices




© 2025 AQA                                                                        23 of 32
                           GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS: FIRST EXAM 2026


                               Organisation
                               • Usually effective use of structural features
                               • Writing is engaging, with a range of
                                 connected ideas
                               • Usually coherent paragraphs with range of
                                 discourse markers

 Level 2           Upper       Content                                             •   Attempts to use           •   Attempts to develop
 Some successful   Level 2     • Communicates with some sustained success              imagery for effect.           narrative perspective.
 communication                   and sustained relevance to focus/task             •   Some development of       •   Attempts to develop
 7–12 marks        10–12                                                               detail and description.       character/s.
                               • Some sustained attempt to match tone, style
                   marks                                                           •   Some range of             •   Some range of vocabulary
                                 and register to purpose and audience
                                                                                       vocabulary and/or             and/or attempts ambitious
                               • Conscious use of vocabulary with some use             attempts ambitious            vocabulary.
                                 of linguistic devices                                 vocabulary.               •   Attempts some
                               Organisation                                        •   Attempts some                 development of setting.
                               • Some use of structural features                       development of            •   Some sequencing/
                               • Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas       setting/place.                developing of events.
                                                                                   •   Some scope of ideas       •   Some use of linguistic
                               • Some use of paragraphs and some use of            •   Some use of linguistic        devices.
                                 discourse markers                                     devices.                  •   Some establishing of plot.
                                                                                   •   Some sequence of          •   Some control of pace.
                   Lower       Content
                                                                                       ideas/detail.             •   Attempts to create
                   Level 2     • Communicates with some success and some           •   Attempts to create            atmosphere/mood.
                                 relevance to focus/task                               atmosphere/mood.          •   Some awareness of style
                   7–9 marks   • Attempts to match tone, style and register to     •   Some awareness of             and purpose.
                                 purpose and audience                                  style and purpose.
                               • Attempts to vary vocabulary with some use of
                                 linguistic devices
                               Organisation
                               • Attempts to use structural features
                               • Some linked and relevant ideas



© 2025 AQA                                                                         24 of 32
                              GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS: FIRST EXAM 2026


                                    • Attempt to write in paragraphs with some
                                      discourse markers, not always appropriate


NB – If a candidate does not directly address the focus of the task, their communication cannot be clear or convincing and therefore the mark for
AO5 is capped at the top of Level 2 –12 marks




© 2025 AQA                                                                              25 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 AO6 Technical accuracy
 Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect,
 with accurate spelling and punctuation. (This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for
 each specification as a whole.)

 Level         Skills descriptors

 Level 4       • Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate
               • Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy
 13–16
 marks         • Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect
               • Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
                 complex grammatical structures

               • High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary
               • Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary

 Level 3       • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate
               • Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success
 9–12 marks
               • Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect
               • Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
                 structures

               • Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words
               • Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary

 Level 2       • Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate
               • Some control of a range of punctuation
 5–8 marks
               • Attempts a variety of sentence forms
               • Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement

               • Some accurate spelling of more complex words
               • Varied use of vocabulary

 Level 1       • Occasional use of sentence demarcation
               • Some evidence of conscious punctuation
 1–4 marks
               • Simple range of sentence forms
               • Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement

               • Accurate basic spelling
               • Simple use of vocabulary

 Level 0       Students’ spelling, punctuation etc. is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding or
 No marks      meaning.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                26 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Response A
The forest was breathing. Not in the way the wind shifts through branches or the way leaves
sigh underfoot, but in a way that made Eliza’s skin prickle. It was alive, pulsing with something
unseen, something watching.

She had been walking for hours, the old map crumpled in her pocket serving as more of a
comfort than a guide. It was barely legible, its edges worn soft by time and use. She had
stopped relying on it a mile ago, realising that the landscape had shifted since the ink had
dried. The trees loomed taller than she had anticipated, their thick, twisted roots threading
together like fingers clasping a secret.

The sun was beginning to bow to the horizon, and she knew she should turn back. Every
rational part of her screamed for retreat, but something held her there, a pull just beneath
her ribs, urging her to take one more step. And then another. And another.
A rustle in the undergrowth. Eliza froze. The air thickened, heavy with anticipation. Her heart
climbed into her throat, hammering against the fragile walls of silence. The sound came again.
Not the dry scamper of a squirrel or the nervous flutter of a bird, but something deliberate.
Something with weight.

Then she saw it.

At first, it was just a shadow - an absence of light between the trees. But as her eyes adjusted,
the form sharpened. A creature unlike anything she had ever seen stood barely ten feet away,
its golden eyes fixed on her with an unreadable intensity. It was large, wolf-like, but not quite.
Its fur was deep, shifting in hues of obsidian and ink, so black it seemed to drink the last rays
of sunlight.

Eliza’s breath hitched. She had read stories, legends passed down in whispers, about
creatures that walked the border of the real and the unreal. Beings that belonged to neither
world, yet commanded both.

The beast took a step forward, its massive paws pressing soundlessly into the damp earth. It
did not growl, did not snarl. It simply watched her, its gaze unwavering.
She could run. She should run. But her feet remained rooted to the ground as if bound by
unseen strings.

The creature tilted its head slightly, curious. Its ears twitched, listening to something Eliza
could not hear. A slow, deliberate exhale left its muzzle, curling into the cooling night air like
smoke from an extinguished flame.

Then, impossibly, it spoke. Not in words, not in any language known to humankind, but in
something deeper. A voice that rumbled through the marrow of her bones, a feeling more
than a sound.

‘Why have you come?’



© 2025 AQA                                                                               27 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

Eliza gasped. It wasn’t a question she had prepared to answer; it wasn’t a question she had
ever expected to be asked. Her mouth dried as her thoughts unravelled, like a thread slipping
through her fingers.

What could she say? That she had been drawn here by something she didn’t understand? That
she had always felt there was more to the world than what could be explained by textbooks
and logic? That she had come looking for something - anything - to prove that she wasn’t just
a girl with foolish dreams?

The creature waited.

‘I- I don’t know,’ she admitted at last, her voice barely louder than the whispering trees.
The golden eyes held hers for a long moment. And then, slowly, the beast lowered itself onto
its haunches, settling into the earth like a shadow returning home.

‘Then listen.’

The word was both invitation and command. The wind stirred, carrying a whisper of
something ancient, something vast. The trees seemed to lean in closer, their branches
forming a cathedral of green and gold above her head. The ground beneath her feet hummed
with life, a heartbeat she had never noticed before. Eliza closed her eyes, inhaling the scent of
damp moss, of pine and earth. And for the first time in her life, she understood what it meant
to *belong* to the world, rather than just exist within it.

When she opened her eyes, the creature was still there, watching.

The night was settling in now, draping the forest in its cool embrace. But Eliza knew, without
doubt, that she had found what she had been searching for.

Or perhaps, it had found her. Whichever way that fate had fallen, their lives were now
irrevocably intertwined. They turned and stepped together, back into the forest. Life was
about to begin.




© 2025 AQA                                                                            28 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 This is a Level 4 response

 This is a convincing response, directly relevant to the focus and task. Although the story
 feels well rounded and arguably complete in itself, the final line, ‘Life was about to begin’,
 gives the sense that this is the opening to a longer piece and as such, showing clear
 understanding that only the opening of a story is requested.

 For Level 4 there is a conceptual aspect – which lifts responses from Level 3.
 Here there is a sense of nature being a sentient force and one which provides the character
 with power and therefore agency.

 The tone and style of the response are very well-matched to the task; this is a very
 well-crafted creative writing entry for a competition, but also there is a sense that the
 specific audience – readers of a wildlife magazine – has been considered and understood.

 The response uses an extensive and ambitious vocabulary, and it is important to note that
 the vocabulary here is not a word list which has been shoehorned into the response; the
 vocabulary is aptly deployed and contributes to the crafting of effective imagery. ‘The wind
 stirred, carrying a whisper of something ancient, something vast’ is an example of this, for
 the words ‘stirred’ and ‘vast’ may not seem to be ambitious or extensive alone, but they are
 used here with impressive effect.

 The response varies both the sentence and paragraphs for effect and, again, these support
 the overall structure of the piece; they do not seem to be forced into place but rather
 carefully considered. The paragraphs are expertly linked and there is a sense of continuity
 throughout the response.

 For AO6, the response also scores highly. Not only is the piece free of errors but there is a
 wide range of punctuation and sentence forms for effect. The overall piece is consistently
 secure and accurate for technical accuracy.


Response B
James had never had a dog before. He’d never even wanted one, if he was honest, the idea of
muddy paw prints on the carpet, dog hair on his clothes, and the smell! Also he was not too
keen on the idea of having to walk a dog. He loved the countryside and to hear the birds
overhead and he did not like seeing other people’s dog mess, he shuddered just thinking
about it. But now, standing in his aunt’s garden, staring at the overexcited bundle of fur in
front of him, he wasn’t sure what to think. Excitment rose in him like a ballon.

The puppy, a golden retriever no bigger than a shoebox, bounced toward him with
overexcited energy. Its ears flopped left and right as it ran, paws too big for its body, tail
wagging so fast it was like a blur. James took an awkward step back. ‘He won’t bite,’ Aunt Lisa
laughed, watching from the doorway. ‘Go on, say hello.’ James swallowed a lump of nerves, he
had never been afraid of dogs exactly, but he didn’t know how to act around them.



© 2025 AQA                                                                              29 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

The puppy had no worries, it was as free as a bird. Within seconds, it launched itself at James’s
trainers, gnawing at the laces with tiny, sharp teeth. He jerked his foot back, but the puppy
only looked up at him, tongue hanging out, eyes which said please play with me!!

‘Guess he likes you,’ Aunt Lisa said and she laughed. James wasn’t so sure. He crouched down
hesitantly, watching as the puppy tried to pounce on a stray leaf which had been floating
through the sky like a piece of litter. It tripped over its own feet, then it landed and rolling
onto its back, legs in the air.

Even though James felt unsure, he chuckled. The puppy stopped moving and turned its head
towards him, as if it had just noticed. Then, in a blur of golden fur, it scrambled upright and
climbed up his legs and flung itself into his lap.

‘Whoa okay!’ James said, nearly toppling over. The puppy licked his chin, paws pressing against
his chest. It smelled of biscuits and looked like sunshine.

Aunt Lisa grinned. ‘Looks like you’ve made a friend.’

James sighed, wiping his damp face with his sleeve, but even though he signed, he was not
cross really. As the puppy curled up in his lap, still wriggling slightly but beginning to settle, he
realised something unexpected. Maybe dogs weren’t so bad after all.

‘Shall we find your lead?’




© 2025 AQA                                                                                30 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026


 This is a Level 3 response

 This is a generally clear response to the task as this is a clear opening to a story and the
 tone, style and register are generally matched to the purpose. It is not particularly evident
 that this is for a ‘wildlife magazine’ as the task states, although there is a possible nod to
 this in the opening paragraph. This is clearly a story about a human meeting an animal and
 so the brief has been met.

 The vocabulary has clearly been chosen for effect in places; words such as ‘launched’ and
 ‘pounced’ to describe the puppy’s movements work well. A feature of ‘clear’ communication
 is the unpacked description – where there are layers to the description that create a clear
 image for the reader. Here the use of linguistic devices in the description of the puppy
 guides the reader to what the writer has imagined and therefore is clear.

 Structural features are used effectively, with paragraphs usually marking a shift in person,
 topic, place or time. The writing progresses coherently and sequentially, with clear
 development from the puppy’s excitement to relaxation, and a bond being created. The
 writing is generally engaging, with a range of ideas and it is clear that this is the start of a
 longer story, so it fulfils the demands of the task to write the opening to a story.

 The AO6 mark is also Level 3, because a variety of sentence forms have been used for
 effect and standard English has been used appropriately. Punctuation is used effectively for
 speech, although in some instances, the control of punctuation is less successful.


Response C
the zoo was bissy and full of noize. People were walking everywhere, chatting and laughing.
Children ran ahead of there parents, pointing at the animals and shouting in excitemint. The
air smelled like popcorn and hotdogs, mixed with the strange smells of the animals muck
there were lots of cages and inclosures, each one holding a different kind of animal. In one
area, monkies swung from branches, chatering loudly. they looked funny as they jumped from
one tree to another, scratching thereselves and starring at the visitors. Some of them picked
up bits of food and threw them at the visitors!!

futher along, the lion inclosure was surrounded by a big glass wall. The lions were lieing down,
looking sleepy in the sun. One of them lifted its head and let out a big yawn, showing its sharp
teath. People took pictures, and a little boy banged on the glass, trying to get the lion to move.
His mum told him of, but he just laughed
the pingiun area was cold and smelled of fish. the pinguins waddled around clumbsy, some of
them diving into the water and swimming really fast!! People leaned over the railing to watch
them splash around. A zookeyper stood nearby, talking about how pingins keep warm even in
freezing water. They have a speshial layer of feathers which is covered in a certain oil which
helps!




© 2025 AQA                                                                               31 of 32
GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – ANSWERS AND COMMENTARIES UPDATED QUESTIONS:
                                                              FIRST EXAM 2026

in the reptilal house, it was dark and warm! Snakes lay curled up under there heat lamps,
there scales shiny. A crocodile floated in a big tank, its eyes just above the water, it looked like
a right menace! was real or fake?

the day went on, and the zoo stayed bussy. Ice cream melted in the sun, and the sounds of
animals and people filled the air. as familys started leaving, some kids begged to stay longer,
while others were already asleep in there pushchairs. the zoo was a place full of life, where
people could see animals from all over the world, even if only for a day


 This is a Level 2 response

 Despite the technical inaccuracies, this response is into Level 2 for content and
 organisation. There is a focus on the task and some success in the communication. There is
 an attempt to use structural features: each paragraph is organised around a different area
 of the zoo and there are some linked and relevant ideas in and between the paragraphs.
 The final paragraph ends with ‘the day went on’ and thus indicates a sense of progression.
 Additionally, the response closes with the paragraph ‘zoo stayed bissy [sic]’ which is
 another attempt to use structural features, as the opening paragraph starts with the same
 idea.

 There are some attempts to vary vocabulary and use linguistic devices: the crocodile looks
 ‘like a right menace’, the snakes’ scales are ‘shiny’, and the monkeys are ‘chatering [sic]
 loudly’. There are other examples of such attempts throughout the piece.

 For the AO6 mark, this piece also falls into Level 2. Although the response has not always
 demarcated sentences – especially at the end of each paragraph – there are enough
 examples of successful demarcation to credit in Level 2. The piece is lacking a range of
 punctuation, although there are some examples of accurately placed commas and some
 varied vocabulary.




© 2025 AQA                                                                               32 of 32
Get help and support
Visit our website for information, guidance, support
and resources at aqa.org.uk/8700
You can talk directly to the English subject team
E: english-gcse@aqa.org.uk
T: 0161 953 7504




Copyright © 2025 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.
AQA Education (AQA) is a registered charity (registered charity number 1073334) and a company limited by
guarantee registered in England and Wales (company number 3644723).
Registered address: AQA, Devas Street, Manchester M15 6EX.
