GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
8700/2
Paper 2 Writers’ viewpoints and perspectives
Mark scheme
June 2024
Version: 1.0 Final
*246G8700/2/MS*
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
2
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant
questions, by a panel of subject teachers. This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the
standardisation events which all associates participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in
this examination. The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’
responses to questions and that every associate understands and applies it in the same correct way.
As preparation for standardisation each associate analyses a number of students’ scripts. Alternative
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for. If, after the
standardisation process, associates encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner.
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper. Assumptions about future mark
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination
paper.
No student should be disadvantaged on the basis of their gender identity and/or how they refer to the
gender identity of others in their exam responses.
A consistent use of ‘they/them’ as a singular and pronouns beyond ‘she/her’ or ‘he/him’ will be credited in
exam responses in line with existing mark scheme criteria.
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk
Copyright information
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third
party even for internal use within the centre.
Copyright © 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
3
Introduction
The information provided for each question is intended to be a guide to the kind of answers anticipated
and is neither exhaustive nor prescriptive. All appropriate responses should be given credit.
Level of response marking instructions
Level of response mark schemes for GCSE English Language are broken down into four levels (where
appropriate). In the first column each level is identified with one or two key words that represent the
differences in the skills then described. These key words show the progression from Level 1 to 4 and
are:
Level 4 Perceptive, detailed
Level 3 Clear, relevant
Level 2 Some, attempts
Level 1 Simple, limited.
This is followed in the second column by a description of the different qualities required in the student’s
answer for that level. These are called the skills descriptors. In order to reach a given level, a student
must fulfil one or more of the skills descriptors for that level.
The third column of the mark scheme is the Indicative Standard. This is an important feature of the mark
scheme for GCSE English Language. It provides exemplification of the skills descriptors at each level
and offers a small number of different comments at the required standard to give an indication of the
quality of response that is typical for that level. It shows the progression from Level 1 to 4.
The Indicative Standard is not intended to be a model answer nor a complete response, and it does not
exemplify required content. Students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the
quality demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that
level.
The standardising scripts will further exemplify each of the levels. You must refer to the standardising
material throughout your marking.
Step 1 Annotate the response
When marking a response you should first read through the student’s answer and annotate each section
using the comments from the statement bank to show the qualities that are being demonstrated, as
instructed during standardising. You can then award a level and a mark.
Step 2 Determine a level
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the
descriptors for that level. The descriptors for the level indicate the different qualities that might be seen
in the student’s answer for that level. If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer. With
practice and familiarity you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the
lower levels of the mark scheme.
The Indicative Standard column in the mark scheme will help you determine the correct level.
Remember, students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the quality
demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that level. It
is not the number of references, but the quality of the comments that will determine the level. The
annotation you added to the script at Step 1 will help you determine the correct level.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
4
Step 3 Determine a mark
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark. This requires you to fine tune within
the level to see how well each of the skills descriptors for that level has been met. A student only has to
meet a skills descriptor at a given level once to be awarded that level. Since responses rarely match a
level in all respects, you need to balance out the range of skills achieved and allow strong performance
in some aspects to compensate for other skills that may be only partially fulfilled. Again, the annotation
added at Step 1 will help you determine the mark.
Reference to the standardising scripts throughout the marking period is essential. This will help you
apply the level descriptors accurately and consistently. There will usually be an answer in the
standardising materials which will correspond with each level of the mark scheme. This answer will have
been awarded a mark by the Lead Examiner. You can compare the student’s answer with the example
to determine if it is the same standard, better or worse than the example. You can then use this to
allocate a mark for the answer based on the Lead Examiner’s mark on the example.
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate.
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks.
Advice
In fairness to students, all examiners must use the same marking methods. The following advice may
seem obvious, but all examiners must follow it closely.
1. Refer constantly to the mark scheme and standardising scripts throughout the marking period.
2. Always credit accurate, relevant and appropriate responses that are not necessarily covered by
the mark scheme or the standardising scripts.
3. Use the full range of marks. Do not hesitate to give full marks if the response merits it.
4. Remember the key to accurate and fair marking is consistency.
5. If you have any doubt about how to allocate marks to a response, consult your Team Leader.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
5
SECTION A: READING – Assessment Objectives
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas.
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts.
AO2 • Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to
achieve effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to
support their views.
AO3 • Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are
conveyed, across two or more texts.
AO4 • Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references.
SECTION B: WRITING – Assessment Objectives
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features
to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
AO6 • Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation.
(This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification
as a whole).
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
6
Assessment Objective Section A
AO1 
AO2 
AO3 
AO4 n/a
Section B
AO5 
AO6 
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
7
0 1 Read again the first part of Source A from lines 1 to 13.
Choose four statements below which are true.
• Shade the circles in the boxes of the ones that you think are true.
• Choose a maximum of four statements.
• If you make an error cross out the whole box.
• If you change your mind and require a statement that has been crossed out then draw
a circle around the box.
[4 marks]
A Lots of people try to get into medical school.
B Universities decide who to accept based only on their A-level grades.
C Adam Kay’s musical qualifications helped to get him a place at medical school.
D Adam Kay finished medical school in 1998.
E Adam Kay thought learning about the human body was a straightforward task.
F Adam Kay was excited by the thought of becoming a doctor.
G Adam Kay thought changing his name would make him a criminal.
H The time it took for Adam Kay to become a doctor went slowly.
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This question assesses the first bullet point identify and interpret explicit and implicit
information and ideas.
A Lots of people try to get into medical school. [T]
B Universities decide who to accept based only on their A-level grades. [F]
C Adam Kay’s musical qualifications helped to get him a place at medical school. [T]
D Adam Kay finished medical school in 1998. [F]
E Adam Kay thought learning about the human body was a straightforward task. [F]
F Adam Kay was excited by the thought of becoming a doctor. [T]
G Adam Kay thought changing his name would make him a criminal. [F]
H The time it took for Adam Kay to become a doctor went slowly. [T]
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
8
0 2 You need to refer to Source A and Source B for this question.
The doctor in Source A and the nurse in Source B are working in different places.
Use details from both sources to write a summary of what you understand about the different
places in which the doctor and the nurse are working.
[8 marks]
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This question assesses both bullets
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level.
It is not a model answer, nor a complete response, nor does it
seek to exemplify any particular content.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
summary
7–8 marks
Shows perceptive or
detailed synthesis and
interpretation of both texts:
• makes perceptive
inferences from both texts
• selects judicious
references/use of textual
detail relevant to the
focus of the question
• statements show
perceptive differences
between texts.
The doctor in Source A is working in a modern
hospital with advanced facilities for treating a range
of patients. The variety of options to ‘book an MRI
scan, refer to rheumatology, arrange an ECG test’
emphasises both the technical equipment and
professional expertise that is available to support him
in doing his job. However, the nurse in Source B is
in the open air by a harbour rather than an
established hospital. Both places show chaotic
conditions, but the doctor is in a safe, dedicated,
hospital in peacetime whereas the nurse has to cope
with huge inconvenience and a complete lack of
facilities, working in a potentially dangerous warzone.
Her patient is ‘a poor artilleryman stretched upon a
wooden pallet’. This incredibly makeshift form of
medical equipment reflects that the nurse is having to
care for patients without even meeting basic human
needs like shelter or beds, because of the demands
of war.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
summary
5–6 marks
Shows clear synthesis and
interpretation of both texts:
• makes clear inferences
from both texts
• selects clear references/
textual detail relevant to
the focus of the question
• statements show clear
differences between
texts.
In Source A the doctor works in a hospital that has a
range of modern facilities. It says ‘book an MRI
scan, refer to rheumatology, arrange an ECG test’,
which shows that he has several options at his
disposal to help treat the patients there. This
hospital seems much more permanent than the
wharf. Instead of a modern ward with technical
equipment, the wharf is a temporary place for
treating wounded soldiers. In Source B, the nurse is
treating ‘a poor artilleryman stretched upon a wooden
pallet’. This means the place where she works only
has limited equipment for the nurse to try to do her
job and make the patients comfortable as best she
can.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
9
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
10
Level 2
Some attempts
at summary
3–4 marks
Shows some interpretation
from one/both texts:
• attempts some
inference(s) from
one/both texts
• selects some appropriate
references/textual detail
from one/both texts
• statements show some
difference(s) between
texts.
In Source A the doctor is part of a busy hospital. It
says ‘book an MRI scan, refer to rheumatology,
arrange an ECG test’, showing there are lots of
options for helping people. However, the wharf in
Source B is very different as there are not so many
options because it says ‘a poor artilleryman stretched
upon a wooden pallet’. This suggests a much more
basic place without as much equipment.
Level 1
Simple, limited
summary
1–2 marks
Shows simple awareness
from one/both texts:
• offers paraphrase rather
than inference
• selects simple
reference(s)/textual
detail(s) from one/both
texts
• statements show simple
difference between texts.
In Source A the doctor is in a hospital because it
says ‘book an MRI scan, refer to rheumatology,
arrange an ECG test’, which shows there is a lot of
things. This is different to Source B because she is
on a wharf where there is ‘a poor artilleryman
stretched upon a wooden pallet’, which shows there
isn't very much there.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
Note
• If the quality of the response is L1 but only deals with one text, the mark must be 1 not 2.
• If the quality of the response is L2 but only deals with one text, the mark must be 3 not 4.
• A candidate has to deal with both texts and address the correct focus of the question to achieve
L3 or above.
The focus of this question is the difference between the places in which the doctor and the nurse are
working.
AO1 content may include ideas such as:
• their surroundings
• their purpose
• their level of permanence
• the working conditions
• their equipment
• their facilities
• their atmosphere
• other staff/level of supervision.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
11
0 3 You now need to refer only to Source A from lines 30 to 39.
How does the writer use language to describe working night shifts at the hospital?
[12 marks]
AO2 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve
effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views.
This question assesses Language ie: Words/Phrases/Language Features/Language
Techniques/Sentence Forms.
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level.
It is not a model answer, nor a complete response, nor does it
seek to exemplify any particular content.
Level 4
Detailed,
perceptive
10–12 marks
Shows detailed and
perceptive understanding of
language:
• analyses the effects of
the writer’s choices of
language
• selects a range of
judicious textual detail
• makes sophisticated and
accurate use of subject
terminology.
The writer develops an extended metaphor to
compare working a night shift to a nightmarish
voyage at sea. He begins the metaphor with ‘sailing
the ship alone’, juxtaposing the huge scale of a ‘ship’,
in this case representing his overwhelming
responsibility, with the isolated sense of being
‘alone’, with no support to lean on. This is further
developed when he describes this metaphorical ship
as ‘enormous, and on fire’. The destructive image of
being ‘on fire’ suggests the huge danger and urgency
of his helpless situation as fire on board a ship is a
horrific and inescapable fate.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
7–9 marks
Shows clear understanding
of language:
• explains clearly the
effects of the writer’s
choices of language
• selects a range of
relevant textual detail
• makes clear and accurate
use of subject
terminology.
The writer uses a metaphor to emphasise the scale
of the task of working the night shift in the hospital.
By comparing his role to ‘sailing the ship alone’, it
suggests a huge responsibility for the treatment of all
of his patients, just like a ship’s captain is responsible
for the safety of their passengers.
Level 2
Some,
attempts
4–6 marks
Shows some understanding
of language:
• attempts to comment on
the effect of language
• selects some appropriate
textual detail
• makes some use of
subject terminology,
mainly appropriately.
The writer uses a metaphor to compare the difficulty
of working on the night shift to ‘sailing the ship alone’.
The use of ‘ship’ suggests that he has a big job to do
and there is nobody there to help him with it.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
12
Level 1
Simple, limited
1–3 marks
Shows simple awareness of
language:
• offers simple comment on
the effect of language
• selects simple
reference(s) or textual
detail(s)
• makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately.
The writer describes working night shifts when he
says ‘sailing the ship alone’. This is a metaphor that
he uses to compare working on the night shift in a
hospital to sailing a ship by himself.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
Note
• If a student writes about language outside of the given lines or from the wrong source (but with the
correct focus), the response should be placed in the appropriate level according to the quality of
what is written, but placed at the bottom of the level.
• A student has to address the correct focus of the question to achieve L3 or above.
AO2 content may include the effect of language features such as:
• juxtaposition/comparison – ‘made Hell look like Disneyland’
• extended metaphor – ‘sailing the ship alone... enormous and on fire’
• adjectives – ‘unrelenting’, ‘endless’
• repetition – ‘ward after ward, nurse after nurse, with emergency after emergency’
• listing/triplet – ‘one-man, mobile, essentially untrained A&E department’
• metaphor – ‘stream of… patients’; ‘unrelenting nightmare’
• direct address – ‘Your senior colleagues…’
• onomatopoeia – ‘bleep’
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
13
0 4 For this question, you need to refer to the whole of Source A, together with the whole of
Source B.
Compare how the writers convey their different feelings and perspectives on providing medical
care.
In your answer, you could:
• compare their different feelings and perspectives on providing medical care
• compare the methods they use to convey their feelings and perspectives
• support your response with references to both texts.
[16 marks]
AO3 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are conveyed,
across two or more texts.
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard provides an exemplification of the skills
descriptors at each level.
It is not a model answer, nor a complete response, nor does it seek
to exemplify any particular content.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
comparison
13–16 marks
Compares ideas and
perspectives in a
perceptive way:
• analyses how writers’
methods are used
• selects a range of
judicious supporting
detail from both texts
• shows a detailed and
perceptive
understanding of the
different ideas and
perspectives in both
texts.
The doctor in Source A describes his constantly shifting
perspective, switching from the relentless horror of night
shifts to the exhilaration of actually surviving the shift.
His miserable life as a doctor is hammered home by a
list: ‘Sure it was hard work, sure the hours were
bordering on inhumane and sure I saw things that have
scarred my retinas to this day,’ with adjectives like
‘inhumane’ suggesting the brutal cruelty of his work.
However, this is undercut by the deliberately casual use
of ‘Sure...’ to indicate his tolerance of such suffering and
by the proud assertion ‘but I was a doctor now’,
indicating that he sees it as a badge of honour. This is
very different to the perspective of Source B, as the
nurse is entirely concerned with the welfare of her
patients and embraces her own humble position,
whereas the doctor in Source A is primarily concerned
with his own professional prestige. The nurse’s sense
of awe is shown when she describes ‘the sympathy and
brotherly love shown by the strong to the weak’
revealing the camaraderie and devotion of the doctors,
with the word ‘brotherly’ suggesting the unquestioning,
self-sacrificial commitment of a family member in caring
for their patients. For Seacole, medicine seems like a
spiritual vocation rather than a professional career as
she feels they are bringing compassion and kindness to
patients in a desperate situation of war and conflict.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
14
Level 3
Clear, relevant
comparison
9–12 marks
Compares ideas and
perspectives in a clear and
relevant way:
• explains clearly how
writers’ methods are used
• selects relevant detail to
support from both texts
• shows a clear
understanding of the
different ideas and
perspectives in both
texts.
The doctor in Source A has mixed feelings about
working in a hospital. He knows it’s traumatic but he
focuses on the practical issues and realises that they
are all part of the job. He uses the list ‘Sure it was
hard work, sure the hours were bordering on
inhumane and sure I saw things that have scarred
my retinas to this day,’ to illustrate just how
demanding his work is, although he finishes with ‘but
I was a doctor now’, putting the previous list into
perspective, showing that he accepts that these
experiences are necessary. Although the nurse in
Source B recognises the practical issues too, she
mainly focuses on the emotional experience of
providing medical care, using the phrase ‘the
sympathy and brotherly love shown by the strong to
the weak’. The adjective ‘brotherly’ suggests that the
doctors are as caring and committed as if they were
treating someone in their own family. This suggests
that she has a very optimistic view of the role of
medical staff, because they are so caring in coming
to the aid of those affected by war.
Level 2
Some attempts
at comparison
5–8 marks
Attempts to compare ideas
and perspectives:
• makes some comment on
how writers’ methods are
used
• selects some appropriate
textual detail/references,
not always supporting,
from one or both texts
• shows some
understanding of different
ideas and perspectives.
The doctor in Source A had a tough experience
training to be a doctor. He says, ‘Sure it was hard
work, sure the hours were bordering on inhumane
and sure I saw things that have scarred my retinas to
this day, but I was a doctor now.’ This list shows that
he had some difficult experiences on his way to
being a doctor. However, in Source B, the nurse is
glad to have helped the wounded soldiers. She says
‘the sympathy and brotherly love shown by the strong
to the weak’. She uses the word ‘brotherly’ to
describe how they treat the patients as if they were
as close as brothers. This shows that she was
impressed by how caring they were.
Level 1
Simple, limited
comment
1–4 marks
Makes simple cross
reference of ideas and
perspectives:
• makes simple
identification of writers’
methods
• selects simple
reference(s)/textual
detail(s) from one or both
texts
• shows simple awareness
of ideas and/or
perspectives.
The doctor in Source A finds working in the hospital
hard. He uses repetition ‘Sure it was hard work, sure
the hours were bordering on inhumane and sure I
saw things that have scarred my retinas to this day,
but I was a doctor now’, which shows that it wasn’t
an easy job to do. However, in Source B the nurse is
more positive because she says ‘the sympathy and
brotherly love shown by the strong to the weak’. The
word ‘sympathy’ shows that she feels sorry for them
but she is still having a better time.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
15
Note
• If the quality of the response is L1 but only deals with one text, the maximum mark is 2.
• If the quality of the response is L2 but only deals with one text, the maximum mark is 6.
• A student has to deal with both texts to achieve L3 or above.
• References to the writers’ methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
AO3 content may include ideas such as:
• their motivation
• the nature of their work
• their experiences of treating others
• their training
• their purpose
and comments on methods such as:
• tone – Source A as humorous, sarcastic, caustic; Source B as emotive, serious, worthy
• use of first person, but use of direct address in both for different purposes
• use of speech in Source B to bring the scene to life
• structural shifts in both pieces, moving from training/arrival to actual practice
• language features – metaphor, hyperbole, repetition in Source A; emotive language, rhetorical
question, exclamations in Source B
• word choices.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
16
0 5 ‘Choosing a future career should be based on helping others and making a positive
contribution to society, not achieving status or making lots of money.’
Write an article for your school or college magazine in which you argue your point of view on
this statement.
(24 marks for content and organisation
16 marks for technical accuracy)
[40 marks]
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style
and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support
coherence and cohesion of texts.
Content and Organisation
Level Skills Descriptors
Level 4
Compelling,
convincing
communication
19–24 marks
Upper Level 4
22–24 marks
Content
• Communication is convincing and compelling.
• Tone, style and register are assuredly matched to
purpose and audience.
• Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with sustained
crafting of linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Varied and inventive use of structural features.
• Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of
convincing and complex ideas.
• Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly
integrated discourse markers.
Lower Level 4
19–21 marks
Content
• Communication is convincing.
• Tone, style and register are convincingly matched
to purpose and audience.
• Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting of
linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Varied and effective structural features.
• Writing is highly engaging with a range of
developed complex ideas.
• Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with
integrated discourse markers.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
17
Upper Level 3
16–18 marks
Content
Level 3
Consistent,
clear
communication
13–18 marks
• Communication is consistently clear.
• Tone, style and register are consistently matched
to purpose and audience.
• Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and
phrasing, chosen for effect with a range of
successful linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Effective use of structural features.
• Writing is engaging, using a range of clear,
connected ideas.
• Coherent paragraphs with integrated discourse
markers.
Lower Level 3
13–15 marks
Content
• Communication is generally clear.
• Tone, style and register are generally matched to
purpose and audience.
• Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and
appropriate use of linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Usually effective use of structural features.
• Writing is engaging, with a range of connected
ideas.
• Usually coherent paragraphs with range of
discourse markers.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
18
Level 2
Some
successful
communication
7–12 marks
Upper Level 2
10–12 marks
Content
• Communicates with some sustained success.
• Some sustained attempt to match tone, style and
register to purpose and audience.
• Conscious use of vocabulary with some use of
linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Some use of structural features.
• Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas.
• Some use of paragraphs and some use of
discourse markers.
Lower Level 2
7–9 marks
Content
• Communicates with some success.
• Attempts to match tone, style and register to
purpose and audience.
• Begins to vary vocabulary with some use of
linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Attempts to use structural features.
• Some linked and relevant ideas.
• Attempt to write in paragraphs with some
discourse markers, not always appropriate.
Upper Level 1
4–6 marks
Content
Level 1
Simple, limited
communication
1–6 marks
• Communicates simply.
• Simple awareness of matching tone, style and
register to purpose and audience.
• Simple vocabulary; simple linguistic devices.
Organisation
• Evidence of simple structural features.
• One or two relevant ideas, simply linked.
• Random paragraph structure.
Lower Level 1
1–3 marks
Content
• Limited communication.
• Occasional sense of matching tone, style and
register to purpose and audience.
• Simple vocabulary.
Organisation
• Limited or no evidence of structural features.
• One or two unlinked ideas.
• No paragraphs.
Level 0
No marks
Students will not have offered any meaningful writing to assess.
Nothing to reward.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/2 – JUNE 2024
19
AO6 Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose
and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation.
(This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification as a whole.)
Technical Accuracy
Level Skills Descriptors
Level 4
13–16 marks
• Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate.
• Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy.
• Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect.
• Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
complex grammatical structures.
• High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary.
• Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary.
Level 3
9–12 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate.
• Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success.
• Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect.
• Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
structures.
• Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words.
• Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary.
Level 2
5–8 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate.
• Some control of a range of punctuation.
• Attempts a variety of sentence forms.
• Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement.
• Some accurate spelling of more complex words.
• Varied use of vocabulary.
Level 1
1–4 marks
• Occasional use of sentence demarcation.
• Some evidence of conscious punctuation.
• Simple range of sentence forms.
• Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement.
• Accurate basic spelling.
• Simple use of vocabulary.
Level 0
No marks
Students’ spelling, punctuation etc is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding
or meaning.
PMT