GCSE
English Language
8700/2: Writers’ viewpoints and perspectives

Report on the examination




Version: 1.0
November 2024



Further copies of this report are available from aqa.org.uk

AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered centres for AQA are permitted to copy material from this
booklet for their own internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to centres to photocopy
any material that is acknowledged to a third party even for internal use within the centre.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                                                1 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024


Contents
The below table is interactive. You can press the control button click on the title of the
question to go directly to that page.


                                                                                        Page
 Contents


 Summary                                                                                3
 Assessment Objectives                                                                  4
 Individual questions                                                                   5
 Further support                                                                        12




© 2025 AQA                                                                                     2 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024


Summary
Overall performance compared to last year
Performance this November has demonstrated that the level of students’ skills as exemplified
in the exam is stable. The mean mark for this series was 32.8 marks, which is very close to the
mean mark in November 2023 of 33.3 marks. This suggests that, despite a rise in the number
of students sitting the exam this November – an increase from 38,000 entries in November
2023 to 48,000 entries in November 2024 – the level of performance has been maintained.

Question paper and source texts
The source texts used in this series were based on travelling to Egypt and exploring the
ancient culture of the Egyptians. Source A was Howard Carter’s first-person account of his
discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun in the Valley of the Kings in 1923. The text introduced
students to the nervous anticipation of the discovery and the sensation of awe and wonder at
finding such untold riches in the tomb, three thousand years after it had been sealed. This
was paired with a nineteenth century source text, a letter sent in 1844 by tourist Sophia Poole
to a friend, describing her visit with her brother, Edward, a British archaeologist, to see the
pyramids. Both texts encapsulate the amazement and astonishment felt at the prospect of
encountering architecture and treasure from an ancient civilisation. The question paper
focuses on both similarities and differences in the two texts, engaging students in a world
many are likely to have encountered earlier in their education.




© 2025 AQA                                                                                3 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024


Assessment objectives

 AO                                                 Common student errors

 AO1                                                Students often found it difficult to
                                                    interpret the ideas they retrieved from the
 Identify and interpret explicit and implicit
                                                    texts, offering direct paraphrase rather
 information and ideas. Select and synthesise
                                                    than inferential understanding.
 evidence from different texts.

 AO2                                                Students were able to name and select a
                                                    number of different language features,
 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers
                                                    but often struggled to analyse the writer’s
 use language and structure to achieve effects
                                                    choice of words or phrases, choosing
 and influence readers, using relevant subject
                                                    instead to infer the meaning of the
 terminology to support their views.
                                                    quotation.

 AO3                                                Students offered understanding and
                                                    comparison of perspectives, but a
 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as
                                                    worrying proportion were unable to
 well as how these are conveyed, across two or
                                                    comment on the methods used by either
 more texts
                                                    of the writers.

 AO5
 Communicate clearly, effectively and               Many students adopted a more
 imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone,        generalised approach to the task,
 style and register for different forms, purposes   responding to the abstract ideas in the
 and audiences. Organise information and            statement without offering a range of
 ideas, using structural and grammatical            concrete examples to substantiate their
 features to support coherence and cohesion of      argument.
 texts.

 AO6
 Students must use a range of vocabulary and        The most common errors were those of
 sentence structures for clarity, purpose and       demarcation and agreement; many
 effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation.    students found it difficult to control the
 (This requirement must constitute 20% of the       agreement of their sentences and
 marks for each specification as a whole)           demarcate them securely with full stops or
                                                    other appropriate punctuation




© 2025 AQA                                                                                  4 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024


Individual questions
Question 1
Performance on Question 1 was at the lower end of the range of achievement, with 40% of
students awarded the full four marks. This compares with 76% in November 2023 and 40% in
November 2022. The cohort of students sitting the exam in November is usually skewed
towards the lower end of the ability range and therefore the levels of literacy are likely to be
slightly weaker. Q1 assesses the careful reading of a short section of text from the beginning
of Source A and requires students to retrieve explicit information and ideas and make
occasional inferences. Particularly for those students for whom English is not their first
language, this can offer real challenges.

The reason for the variation in marks across different series is to do with the nature of the
statements and the possibility of students misunderstanding the specific vocabulary or
phrasing in the text. It is not a straight-forward task to predict which words, phrases or ideas
students will find challenging to retrieve accurately. There was a combination of explicit
information and implicit ideas in the designated section of text in Source A, as has been the
case in previous series.

Common strengths
The students who scored full marks were able to identify the information accurately; made
effective inferences regarding the narrator’s experience and were able to track the
information in the eight statements chronologically through the given extract. The most
effective way to secure the four marks was also to colour in the lozenge in the answer booklet
to identify the four true statements correctly. There was a far higher incidence of correctly
completed answers in this series, which is a positive sign of improvement. Students were able
to process the eight statements methodically and make their choices systematically, recording
their answers clearly and efficiently.

Common misunderstandings
There was no single statement which students struggled to understand. Some students failed
to appreciate that the fact this was the last season Carter was intending to spend looking for
treasure in Egypt meant they had already planned to leave, which was assessed in Statement
A. Likewise, some students mistook the discovery of the staircase in the text to mean that a
wooden staircase had been found, which was false, as the text states that the staircase was
‘cut into the rock’. Careful reading was also required to discriminate between the fact that
Carter was certain this was a significant discovery and the subsequent comment in the text
that Carter was worried the tomb had already been plundered. There are always pitfalls for
those students who have a tendency to rush through Q1 in order to move on to the longer
questions, and those who fail to think carefully about each of the eight statements.

There are other ways in which students can fail to achieve full marks on Q1. Selecting more
than four statements results in an automatic reduction in the student’s final mark for this
question. Students who select five, six, seven or even eight statements as true lose one mark
for each additional choice beyond the required four, significantly impacting their overall score.
This should be avoided at all costs.



© 2025 AQA                                                                                  5 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

Question 2
The question focused on the appearance in both texts of robbers. In both sources, the
protagonist encounters either a group or a lone robber and is involved in preventing a theft.
The material relating to these potential robberies came from relatively discrete sections of
text which made it slightly easier for students to retrieve and synthesise the relevant
information from each text. There was some confusion in the responses of some students
who overlooked the presence of the thieves in each text and chose to interpret the actions of
the writers themselves as robbery.

Whilst it is possible to see that Carter was a ‘thief’ in terms of cultural and/or colonial
appropriation, for the vast majority of students this was not the point they were making; they
simply mistook the actions of Carter breaking into the tomb and Poole creeping into the
pyramid as the actions of robbers. This was rewarded at Level 1 and Level 2, but not at Level 3
or 4 as the interpretation was not a clear reading of the text. This did not impact many
students, as the vast majority were providing a quality of comment which was likely to be
rewarded at Level 2 regardless of the interpretation. Performance in this question was slightly
lower than November 2023 with the mean mark falling below 3 marks to 2.98.

There was sufficient material to draw on across the two texts, with the robbers in Source A
demonstrating a level of organisation, experience, local knowledge, pragmatism and rational
decision-making, whereas in Source B the lone robber appeared to be less organised and
perhaps more opportunistic; more reluctant to listen to warnings; more audacious in setting
out during the day to make his raid, but ultimately as easily deterred by a show of force.

Common strengths in responses
The strongest responses were those where the students made clear interpretations about the
actions or attitudes of the robbers, and explained clearly, for example, not just that they
travelled to a remote region to carry out the robbery, but that this showed they had detailed
local knowledge of the area, or that they were cunning and devious in wanting to evade
capture. Either of these interpretations (or similar), which were plausible in light of the details
in the text, were rewarded at Level 3 where they were clearly explained. Students were also
required to synthesise their ideas, at Level 3 offering a ‘like for like’ synthesis, for example, the
level of organisation and preparedness of the robbers, or the speed with which they reacted
to being caught.

To achieve Level 4, students needed to extend their understanding in detail or to be
perceptive. Such responses were rare but there were some students who, for instance,
challenged whether the reader could be sure that the robber in Source B was indeed intent
on theft and whether their evasive behaviour was the result of belligerence and violent intent
or in fact innocence.

Common misunderstandings
There were many weaker responses where students struggled to do more than select
quotations and paraphrase the information themselves. Many students identified, for
example, that in one source there were eight robbers and in the other just one robber. Where
this simple difference was identified, it was rewarded at Level 1 as no attempt was made to
indicate what the student understood or could explain about the difference in numbers.
Where students offered some understanding (but without full explanation), such as that the


© 2025 AQA                                                                                      6 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

eight robbers were safer in a group or that the lone robber was braver, these were rewarded
at Level 2 as ‘some difference’ as they provided some incomplete, partial understanding of the
ideas. Students who mistook the identity of the robbers were rewarded at either Level 1 or
Level 2.

Question 3
The task in Q3 was to explain how the writer in Source A uses language to describe their
discovery. As last year, the same lines in Source B also refer to the discovery of a tomb and a
minority of students chose to write about the wrong source. Where their comments were
about the correct focus – the discovery – they were rewarded at the same level but towards
the bottom of the level, depending on the quality of their comment. This is in line with the
rubric as set out in the mark scheme and attempts to offer some reward for students despite
their error.

There was a wide range of different language features to choose from, but students tended to
opt for the same few: the excitement ‘burning like a fever’, the ‘glint of gold’, ‘struck dumb’ and
the light which ‘pierced the darkness’. Many students demonstrated that they were able to
select these details appropriately and identify them using the right subject terms but were
unable to comment clearly on their effects. This is the key skill and determines the level.
Naming language features and selecting details are supporting skills and cannot determine
the student’s overall level.

Common strengths in responses
Students rewarded at Level 3 offered clear explanations, for example, of how the writer felt
the physical effects of the excitement of discovering the tomb, as if he were ‘burning like the
heat of a fever’. They were able to drill down into the image and explain the connotations of a
fever being a high temperature; or a physical weakness; a shivering, shaking, out of body
experience where the sufferer is almost hallucinating, thus emphasising the intensity of his
excitement and anticipation. Students working at Level 3 tended to avoid writing about simple
adjectives or adverbs, rightly recognising that they would be difficult to explore in sufficient
detail.

Responses at Level 4 were rare. Students working at this level were often drawn to examples
of language features which offered richer rewards, such as ‘For the moment – an eternity –‘.
The abstract concept of time and the deliberate juxtaposition of an instant being compared to
infinity allowed some students the opportunity to describe how the writer uses the contrast to
encapsulate the momentous nature of the discovery and to emphasise a sense of time
elapsing.

Common misunderstandings
At Level 1, students tended to select examples of language and identify language techniques
with more or less accuracy but offered a generic or generalised comment, such as ‘…which
shows us how he feels.’ Students at this level often selected unsuitable phrases which left
them with no opportunity to do anything other than paraphrase what they understood, such
as the adjective ‘bewildering’ showing how bewildered he felt. To move into Level 2, students
need to at least find a synonym for the words they select, such as ‘confusing’ or
‘disorientating’.



© 2025 AQA                                                                                    7 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

The vast majority of students were rewarded with marks in Level 2, indicating that they were
able to make some attempt to comment on the effects, but they did not fully explain how or
why the writer had chosen that particular word, phrase or image, often providing inferential
understanding instead of analysis of language. Students typically offered comments that the
alliteration in ‘glint of gold’ showed that there was so much gold shining in the tomb. To move
into Level 3, students would be advised to focus on the word ‘glint’ and explain why this word
has been chosen – because it suggests a hint or flash of light, like a reflection which flashes
and then disappears – to describe how the treasure shone in the light of the torch through
the spyhole. Why did the writer use the word ‘glint’ and not ‘gleam’ or ‘glow’ or ‘sparkle’ which
would each create slightly different effects?


Question 4
The task in Question 4 was to compare the writers’ attitudes and feelings about their
experiences in Egypt. The narrow, discrete focus of Q2 ensured that fewer students were
tempted to reproduce their response to Q2 in their response to Q4 and encouraged students
to start from scratch with their answers. The focus of the question was on the similarities of
the writers’ feelings, as it was in November 2023. This focus tends to encourage students to
make more ‘like for like’ comparisons as they see the parallels rather than the differences.
Certainly, most students were able to comment on how both writers were amazed and
overwhelmed by their experiences and thereby reach a mark of 5 or 6 in Level 2. It was clear
that students occasionally struggled to find words to describe the writer’s feelings beyond
those used by the writers themselves. Students need to be aware that paraphrase is a Level 1
skill and they should seek to use as wide a range of vocabulary as possible, of their own
words, to explain the feelings in the text.

There was much to say about Howard Carter’s feelings and attitudes as the source text
offered a plethora of possibilities, ranging from tremulous excitement to dogged
determination and philosophical entrancement. Students tended to favour Source A, finding it
more challenging to discern Sophia Poole’s feelings other than her admiration for the
grandeur of the pyramids. Some students may have found this slightly more nuanced text
more difficult to access, in part because the writer’s attitude appears to shift once she enters
the pyramid and finds it empty.

Common strengths in responses
Students in Level 3 were able to explain, for example, how Carter’s use of the phrase ‘struck
dumb’ showed the intensity of his delight at discovering the ancient tomb, using the word
‘struck’ to reinforce the sudden, shocking impact of the sight, as if he had been hit by
lightning; or how Poole’s use of facts and statistics demonstrated in a measured but equally
awestruck way just how impressive the dimensions and scale of the pyramids appeared to
her.

The best responses were where students identified how both writers are transfixed by the
passing of time and were able to see the similarities in their reflections on how three
thousand years has passed as if it were the blink of an eye. Students used the quotation ‘for a
moment – an eternity’ to analyse Carter’s sense of time collapsing, the juxtaposition of
‘moment’ and ‘eternity’ playing with the concept of time passing - both past and future. They
compared this to Poole’s sense of the ‘freshness’ of the pyramids, as she similarly considers



© 2025 AQA                                                                                  8 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

how the passing of millennia appears to have happened without affecting the brightness and
immediacy of the ancient monuments.

Common misunderstandings
At Level 2, many students compared the writers’ feelings as both ‘amazed’ and ‘excited’ but
found little else to offer to extend their response and provide a clear explanation of their
attitudes. Some reverted to material they had already produced in response to Q2 and re-
introduced the robbers, but this provided limited opportunity to explore attitudes as it wasn’t
entirely clear how either writer felt about these encounters and students were left to
speculate. Too many students did not comment on methods at all, and thereby limited
themselves to the bottom half of the level. The weakest responses were those where students
simply paraphrased or recounted the events of both sources and reused the same words
used by the writers themselves to describe their feelings. Developing students’ ability to use
synonyms is one way of ensuring they can move from Level 1 to Level 2.


Question 5
The task in Q5 invited students to write an article for their centre’s website arguing their point
of view on the idea that the past is a waste of time and we should focus on the future instead.
The thematic link to the reading sources is clear, with the focus on history and many students
responded with enthusiasm to the proposed binary opposition with some more balanced
arguments. Some students appeared to struggle with words in the statement such as
‘innovation’ and ‘irrelevant’, which resulted in fewer students than expected engaging in
discussion of the future and focusing instead on our relationship with the past.

Many students focused on the abstract ideas of ‘past’, ‘present’ and ‘future’ and offered
generalised responses which explained their preference, but provided very few ideas of what
it is from history, for example, what we learn and how do we ensure that history doesn’t
repeat itself, as many were keen to suggest. Students fared better when they were able to
draw on specific examples from the past – World War 2; the suffragette movement; race
relations protests; Covid-19; the bubonic plague etc – and drew on these events to extrapolate
from them lessons which could be learned. This did not require GCSE History as many of
these events are covered in other areas of the curriculum and are very much general
knowledge. Similarly, those students who wrote about the future were more successful where
they could point to specific advances – in medicine, artificial intelligence, transport, alternative
power supplies, environmental initiatives etc – and explored how these should be a priority.
General, abstract ‘big ideas’ are welcome, but they need to be substantiated by specific
examples and granular explanation. The reverse is also true: personal anecdotes and
experience are also welcome but need to be expanded to take in the bigger picture and the
big ideas.

There was widespread evidence that students are structuring their responses more carefully
and adopting a more coherent perspective. There are fewer examples of arguments which flip
back and forth, agreeing and disagreeing randomly with the statement. There are more
examples where students offer an introduction at the start, a series of more or less connected
paragraphs and a conclusion, which has not always been the case. This suggests that students
are increasingly well-prepared for the writing task and is a credit to both them and their
teachers.



© 2025 AQA                                                                                    9 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

Common strengths
The best responses were those where the student presented a coherent response to the
statement which included some clear ideas about the past, such as the importance of
remembering the sacrifice of those who gave their lives in war so that we might live in peace,
or the value to women in particular of the bravery and commitment of those who fought for
equal rights, including the right to vote and how this should never be forgotten. Students
working at Level 3 developed their ideas within paragraphs, clearly explaining what lessons
were learnt, how we have benefited from learning about them and how we should continue
to appreciate their sacrifice. These clear connected ideas were expressed using a range of
vocabulary clearly chosen for effect, with a scattering of linguistic devices used to engage their
readers. Technically, responses at Level 3 were characterised by the word ‘mostly’ in that their
range of punctuation, sentence control and spelling were mostly accurate, with a variety of
sentence forms deployed for impact.

The very best responses were, as expected, few and far between in the November series, but
there were some examples of compelling arguments. Students working at Level 4 were able
to provide cogent, inventive, highly engaging perspectives on the statement. It is often the
confident tone of these responses and the assured style of their writing which create the first
strong impression of the quality of response, with students often adopting an original
perspective, such as the proposal to replace history lessons in centres with future lessons and
a detailed account of the curriculum. Others drew on events from the history of their own
culture and countries, arguing passionately for leaders to learn from the mistakes of the past.
Yet others took inspiration from the US election (which took place the day before the exam) to
explore the implications of voting a second time for Donald Trump as President and what this
teaches us about not repeating the past. These responses are always detailed and offer more
complex ideas, reflecting the critical thinking and conscious crafting of the students in
presenting their points of view. Technically, these responses were not by any means flawless;
some students achieved marks for AO5 in Level 4 and marks for AO6 in Level 3 and vice versa.
The separation of the content and accuracy marks allows examiners to reward students for
the quality of their ideas, regardless of the technical inaccuracies, as the AO6 mark is a
completely independent judgement.

Common misunderstandings
There were some responses which met the criteria for Level 1 but did not move into Level 2.
These tended to be brief and limited in scope. They were often characterised by a pedestrian
or informal register which was not suitable for the centre’s website and offered little by way of
variation in vocabulary. Few students at Level 1 are using paragraphs or extending their ideas
beyond a repetition of the same basic premise. To move into Level 2, students needed to
expand their vocabulary; structure their writing with paragraphs and begin to build their
sentences so each one picks up on the previous one and looks ahead to the next.

At Level 2, students typically offered generalised responses; those who were able to offer a
more interesting variety of relevant ideas were likely to be rewarded at the upper end of the
level. Some students focused their answer on presenting a point of view about history lessons
in centres and how boring they were, with personal anecdotes of their tedium, expert
opinions from history teachers and spurious statistics from supposed student surveys on the
popularity of history as a GCSE choice. This tended to restrict students unless they were able
to use these points to extrapolate a wider perspective on educational priorities and the


© 2025 AQA                                                                                  10 of 12
             Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024

potential value of learning about the future. Other students working at this level offered
arguments about how we must learn from history without taking into account the self-evident
facts that war has not been consigned to the past, people are still dying from diseases we
cannot cure, and our society may well not be a model of harmony diversity and equality.
There was some evidence at Level 2 of an intent to demonstrate variety of sentence
structures and, as a consequence, of punctuation too. Poor control of agreement continues to
be frequently seen as students find syntax, use of tenses and use of prepositions challenging.
Basic sentence demarcation was missing at the lower end of the ability range and is
something which perhaps students could be encouraged to check after they have finished
writing, if they have time.




© 2025 AQA                                                                              11 of 12
                 Report on the examination – English Language – 8700/2 – November 2024


Further support
Mark ranges and award of grades
Grade boundaries and cumulative percentage grades are available on the results statistics
page of the AQA Website.


Enhanced Results Analysis (ERA)
Use our exam results analysis tool to create and customise as many different reports for
comparison as you like.


Feedback on the exams
Attend one of our feedback courses where you can review example responses from students
and commentaries from our examiners


Insight reports
Will be available on our website early in the autumn term and contain useful summaries,
analysis and infographics.




© 2025 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.                                         12 of 12
