GCSE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE
8700/1
Paper 1 Explorations in creative reading and writing
Mark scheme
June 2024
Version: 1.0 Final
*246g8700/1/MS*
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
2
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant
questions, by a panel of subject teachers. This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the
standardisation events which all associates participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in
this examination. The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’
responses to questions and that every associate understands and applies it in the same correct way.
As preparation for standardisation each associate analyses a number of students’ scripts. Alternative
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for. If, after the
standardisation process, associates encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner.
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper. Assumptions about future mark
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination
paper.
No student should be disadvantaged on the basis of their gender identity and/or how they refer to the
gender identity of others in their exam responses.
A consistent use of ‘they/them’ as a singular and pronouns beyond ‘she/her’ or ‘he/him’ will be credited in
exam responses in line with existing mark scheme criteria.
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk
Copyright information
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications. However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third
party even for internal use within the centre.
Copyright © 2024 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
3
Introduction
The information provided for each question is intended to be a guide to the kind of answers anticipated
and is neither exhaustive nor prescriptive. All appropriate responses should be given credit.
Level of response marking instructions
Level of response mark schemes for GCSE English Language are broken down into four levels (where
appropriate). In the first column each level is identified with one or two key words that represent the
differences in the skills then described. These key words show the progression from Level 1 to 4 and
are:
Level 4 Perceptive, detailed
Level 3 Clear, relevant
Level 2 Some, attempts
Level 1 Simple, limited.
This is followed in the second column by a description of the different qualities required in the student’s
answer for that level. These are called the skills descriptors. In order to reach a given level, a student
must fulfil one or more of the skills descriptors for that level.
The third column of the mark scheme is the Indicative Standard. This is an important feature of the mark
scheme for GCSE English Language. It provides exemplification of the skills descriptors at each level
and offers a small number of different comments at the required standard to give an indication of the
quality of response that is typical for that level. It shows the progression from Level 1 to 4.
The Indicative Standard is not intended to be a model answer nor a complete response, and it does not
exemplify required content. Students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the
quality demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that
level.
The standardising scripts will further exemplify each of the levels. You must refer to the standardising
material throughout your marking.
Step 1 Annotate the response
When marking a response you should first read through the student’s answer and annotate each section
using the comments from the statement bank to show the qualities that are being demonstrated, as
instructed during standardising. You can then award a level and a mark.
Step 2 Determine a level
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the
descriptors for that level. The descriptors for the level indicate the different qualities that might be seen
in the student’s answer for that level. If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer. With
practice and familiarity you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the
lower levels of the mark scheme.
The Indicative Standard column in the mark scheme will help you determine the correct level.
Remember, students may reach a given level by making one or more comments of the quality
demonstrated by the Indicative Standard and do not have to meet all the skill descriptors at that level. It
is not the number of references, but the quality of the comments that will determine the level. The
annotation you added to the script at Step 1 will help you determine the correct level.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
4
Step 3 Determine a mark
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark. This requires you to fine tune within
the level to see how well each of the skills descriptors for that level has been met. A student only has to
meet a skills descriptor at a given level once to be awarded that level. Since responses rarely match a
level in all respects, you need to balance out the range of skills achieved and allow strong performance
in some aspects to compensate for other skills that may be only partially fulfilled. Again, the annotation
added at Step 1 will help you determine the mark.
Reference to the standardising scripts throughout the marking period is essential. This will help you
apply the level descriptors accurately and consistently. There will usually be an answer in the
standardising materials which will correspond with each level of the mark scheme. This answer will have
been awarded a mark by the Lead Examiner. You can compare the student’s answer with the example
to determine if it is the same standard, better or worse than the example. You can then use this to
allocate a mark for the answer based on the Lead Examiner’s mark on the example.
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate.
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks.
Advice
In fairness to students, all examiners must use the same marking methods. The following advice may
seem obvious, but all examiners must follow it closely.
1. Refer constantly to the mark scheme and standardising scripts throughout the marking period.
2. Always credit accurate, relevant and appropriate responses that are not necessarily covered by the
mark scheme or the standardising scripts.
3. Use the full range of marks. Do not hesitate to give full marks if the response merits it.
4. Remember the key to accurate and fair marking is consistency.
5. If you have any doubt about how to allocate marks to a response, consult your Team Leader.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
5
SECTION A: READING – Assessment Objectives
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas.
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts.
AO2 • Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to
achieve effects and influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to
support their views.
AO3 • Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how these are
conveyed, across two or more texts.
AO4 • Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references.
SECTION B: WRITING – Assessment Objectives
AO5 • Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting
tone, style and register for different forms, purposes and audiences.
• Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features
to support coherence and cohesion of texts.
AO6 • Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and punctuation. (This
requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each specification as a
whole).
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
6
Assessment
Objective
Section A
AO1 ✓
AO2 ✓
AO3 N/A
AO4 ✓
Section B
AO5 ✓
AO6 ✓
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
7
0 1 Read again the first part of the source from lines 1 to 6.
List four things about Mary from this part of the source.
[4 marks]
Give 1 mark for each point about Mary:
• responses must be drawn only from lines 1 to 6 of the text
• responses must show some evidence of selection
• responses can be quotations or paraphrases
• responses can be a single word; full sentences are not required.
Note: The indicative content must not be treated as exhaustive, and reference must be made to the
selected section of the text.
AO1 • Identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
• Select and synthesise evidence from different texts
This assesses bullet point 1: identify and interpret explicit and implicit information and ideas
Indicative content
Students may include:
• Mary doesn’t like the heat
• her head ached
• her limbs were heavy
• her limbs were tense
• she went to the bedroom
• she examined her clothes
• she was looking for things to do
• she had no embroidery to do
• she had no alterations to do
• she had nothing to do
• her head began to swim
• she went to get a glass of water.
• she could hear cicadas
• she had to go back to the house
• she had to get a glass of water
• she was on the veranda
• she was bored
• she was thirsty
• she was hot
• she wandered
• she went back to the house
• she was unwell /ill
• she would get up
Any responses which combine two or more correct points should be awarded the appropriate
mark.
e.g. • She wandered [] on to the veranda [] 2 marks
Her limbs were heavy [] and tense.[] 2 marks
Mary’s head ached [], her limbs were heavy[] and tense.[] 3 marks
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
8
Or any other valid responses that you are able to verify by checking the source.
Reject:
• It was hot
• She was tired
• She went into the bathroom
• She drank a glass of water
• The cicadas shrilled incessantly
• She was dehydrated
• She liked embroidery
• anything about the setting that doesn’t include Mary.
Ask yourself the following questions:
• does it tell you something about Mary?
• is it from the correct section of the text?
• is it true/accurate?
• if you precede the response with ‘Mary...’ or ‘Mary’s...’ does it make sense?
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
9
0 2 Look in detail at this extract, from lines 7 to 17 of the source:
How does the writer use language here to describe the effects of the heat?
You could include the writer’s choice of:
• words and phrases
• language features and techniques
• sentence forms.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses Language ie: Words/Phrases/Language Features/Language
Techniques/Sentence Forms
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
analysis
7–8 marks
Shows perceptive and
detailed understanding of
language:
• Analyses the effects of the
writer’s choices of
language
• Selects a range of
judicious textual detail
• Makes sophisticated and
accurate use of subject
terminology
The image of ‘the heat waves beat up out of the hot
stone’ shows how powerfully violent the effect of the
heat is. The stones are inert and yet the intense
heat creates a sense of oppressive movement in the
waves that Mary can see. Further, the writer uses a
simile to describe how the heat lizards ‘darted over
the rocks like flames.’ The imagery of the lizards
transforming into fire conveys Mary’s perception of
the heat’s power to change elements of nature. The
word ‘darted’ extends the image of the lizards as
being able to move swiftly and erratically, as does
fire.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
explanation
5–6 marks
Shows clear understanding of
language:
• Explains clearly the effects
of the writer’s choices of
language
• Selects a range of relevant
textual detail
• Makes clear and accurate
use of subject terminology
The writer describes how the heat lizards ‘darted
over the rocks like flames.’ The simile ‘like flames’
suggests that the heat is so powerful that it is
reflected in the wildlife. By comparing them to
flames, the writer shows that the heat has
consumed the lizards and they are now part of it.
The verb ‘darted’ creates the imagery of the lizards’
rapid movements, as they leap across the rocks.
The writer suggests that the heat has made them
flicker and spread quickly like flames.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
10
Level 2
Some
understanding
and comment
3–4 marks
Shows some understanding
of language:
• Attempts to comment on
the effect of language
• Selects some appropriate
textual detail
• Makes some use of subject
terminology, mainly
appropriately
The heat lizards ‘darted over the rocks like flames’.
The word ‘darted’ suggests that the heat is so strong
that the lizards cannot stay still. The word ‘flames’
suggest that rocks are as hot as fire.
Level 1
Simple, limited
comment
1–2 marks
Shows simple awareness of
language:
• Offers simple comment on
the effect of language
• Selects simple references
or textual details
• Makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
The heat lizards ‘darted over the rocks like flames’.
The word ‘flames’ tells us they were hot like fire.
The word ‘darted’ shows the lizards are fast.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward
Note: If a student writes only about language outside of the given lines, the response should be
placed in either Level 1 or Level 2, according to the quality of what is written.
AO2 content may include the effect of ideas such as:
• abstract noun: ‘obsession’ to convey how Mary is consumed by the heat
• verb phrases: the heat waves ‘beat up’ and ‘beat down’ suggesting aggression or abuse, and being
trapped by the heat
• adjectives: lizards described as ‘vivid red and blue and emerald’ implying that the heat brings
them alive
• verbs: dogs ‘panting’ and ‘whining’ linking to the idea of pain and suffering in the heat and reflecting
Mary’s own feelings
• simile: the lizards ‘darted over the rocks like flames’, implying the heat enables them to thrive,
contrasting the dogs and Mary
• metaphor: ‘sapping, undermining waves’ comparing the heat to the ocean, intensifying its power
• sibilance/onomatopoeia: ‘hissed with dryness’ to show relief or suffering/the sound of water
• long sentence: ‘She would lock... pouring it over her.’ to reflect how the heat draws out everything
and makes each simple action take longer.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
11
0 3 You now need to think about the whole of the source.
This text is taken from the middle of a novel.
How has the writer structured the text to interest you as a reader?
You could write about:
• what the writer focuses your attention on at the beginning of the source
• how and why the writer changes this focus as the source develops
• any other structural features that interest you.
[8 marks]
AO2
Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use language and structure to achieve effects and
influence readers, using relevant subject terminology to support their views
This question assesses how the writer has structured a text. Structural features can be: at a
whole text level eg beginnings/endings/perspective shifts; at a paragraph level eg topic
change/aspects of cohesion; and at a sentence level when judged to contribute to whole structure.
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
analysis
7–8 marks
Shows perceptive and
detailed understanding of
structural features:
• Analyses the effects of
the writer’s choices of
structural features
• Selects a range of
judicious examples
• Makes sophisticated
and accurate use of
subject terminology
The opening focus on how ‘suddenly, the heat became
intolerable’ is a moment of exposition in which we learn
how unaccustomed Mary is to the life that she is now
part of. The fact that she is already at her breaking
point with the heat at the very beginning of the extract
implies that there will be a climactic moment when she
snaps. This becomes more evident through the time
shift in paragraph two, ‘as time passed’. The absence
of detail here suggests that Mary is so consumed by the
heat that time seems to have become irrelevant and
immeasurable to her and she appears to be losing her
grip on reality.
Level 3
Clear, relevant
explanation
5–6 marks
Shows clear
understanding of structural
features:
• Explains clearly the
effects of the writer’s
choices of structural
features
• Selects a range of
relevant examples
• Makes clear and
accurate use of subject
terminology
The text opens with a focus on how ‘suddenly, the heat
became intolerable’, and we immediately understand
that Mary was unprepared for, and shocked by, this
weather. It creates tension from the very beginning
because we know she already feels that she can’t take
the heat any longer. There is a shift in time in
paragraph two as, ‘time passed’ but there is no detail of
how much time has passed or what happens in that
time, showing how the heat is the only thing that Mary
can think about.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
12
Level 2
Some
understanding
and comment
3–4 marks
Shows some
understanding of structural
features:
• Attempts to comment on
the effect of structural
features
• Selects some
appropriate examples
• Makes some use of
subject terminology,
mainly appropriately
At the beginning, the writer tells us that the heat
‘suddenly’ became ‘intolerable’, so we immediately
understand the heat in this place is worse than normal,
which is why Mary feels so bad. The writer repeats the
idea of heat in paragraph two because ‘as time passed,
the heat became an obsession’, showing how the heat
is all Mary can think about.
Level 1
Simple, limited
comment
1–2 marks
Shows simple awareness
of structural features:
• Offers simple comment
on the effect of structure
• Selects simple
reference(s) or
example(s)
• Makes simple use of
subject terminology, not
always appropriately
The text begins with a description of the heat where it
says ‘suddenly, the heat became intolerable’ which sets
the scene so we know that Mary and Dick live in a
really hot place. Then, the writer says ‘as time passed,
the heat became an obsession’ so we know that the
heat keeps getting worse over time.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward
AO2 content may include the effect of ideas such as:
• exposition: the setting and how harsh it is, Mary’s thoughts and feelings to help us understand her
suffering
• focus shifts: the movement of the text from outside to inside; the verandah as a space in between
both that positions Mary looking out at the world
• third person narrative: allows for a switch between external description and the internal thoughts of
both Dick and Mary
• temporal shifts: the passing of time throughout – ‘as time passed’, ‘one day’, to help us understand
that time passes without much happening
• flashback: brief glimpse at Mary’s previous life at line 21 to contrast with her married life; at line 30
describing Mary watching the water arriving emphasising how important it is to her
• dialogue: between Mary and Dick to show a build-up of tension in the relationship
• anti-climax: expectation of an argument that subsides when Dick apologises.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
13
0 4 Focus this part of your answer on the second part of the source, from line 18 to the end.
A student said, “Dick’s anger towards Mary is really unfair. The writer makes it clear that Mary
is totally powerless in this relationship.”
To what extent do you agree?
In your response you could:
• consider whether Dick’s anger is unfair
• evaluate how the writer presents Mary and Dick’s relationship
• support your response with references to the text.
[20 marks]
AO4
Evaluate texts critically and support this with appropriate textual references
Level Skills Descriptors Indicative Standard
This indicative standard is not a model answer, nor a complete
response. Nor does it seek to exemplify any particular content.
Rather, it is an indication of the standard for the level.
Level 4
Perceptive,
detailed
evaluation
16–20 marks
Shows perceptive and
detailed evaluation:
• Develops a convincing
and critical response to
the focus of the statement
• Shows perceptive
understanding of writer’s
methods
• Selects a range of
judicious textual detail
• Evaluates critically and in
detail the effect(s) on the
reader
The intensity of Dick’s anger towards Mary could be
considered as unfair as her lack of understanding of
the value of water presents her as a criminal. When
she tells him she has been using the water, he looks at
her ‘as if she had committed a crime’, which is an
irrational reaction to her rational desire to cool herself.
The writer uses this simile to present Mary as both a
criminal and a prisoner, suggesting she is trapped in
the relationship, the heat and the farm. Either way, we
see Mary as powerless to escape in this moment.
However, Dick’s guilt can be seen more explicitly when
he is ‘suddenly sorry’ at the end. By presenting his
sudden need for forgiveness, the writer conveys Dick’s
fear of losing Mary, placing her in the ultimate position
of power.
Level 3
Clear,
relevant
evaluation
11–15 marks
Shows clear and relevant
evaluation:
• Makes a clear and
relevant response to the
focus of the statement
• Shows clear
understanding of writer’s
methods
• Selects a range of
relevant textual
references
• Evaluates clearly the
effect(s) on the reader
The intensity of Dick’s anger is unfair, considering Mary
is suffering so badly in the heat; something he clearly
doesn’t understand. When she tells him about the
water, he looks at her ‘as if she had committed a
crime’, showing a complete lack of concern for her
well-being. Through this simile, the writer has placed
Mary in the position of the criminal, whilst Dick is the
judge condemning her actions and making her totally
powerless. However, this feeling almost instantly fades
when he becomes ‘suddenly sorry’. Here the writer
seems to be suggesting that his initial reaction was
actually frustration as Mary was wasting water, but her
anger at his words and his ‘apologising, blaming
himself’, conveys the power that she has over him.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
14
Level 2
Some,
evaluation
6–10 marks
Shows some attempts at
evaluation:
• Makes some response to
the focus of the statement
• Shows some
understanding of writer’s
methods
• Selects some appropriate
textual reference(s)
• Makes some evaluative
comment(s) on effect(s)
on the reader
I agree that it is unfair for Dick to be so angry with Mary
because she is only using the water to try to make
herself more comfortable, and he looks at her ‘as if she
had committed a crime.’ The simile compares Mary to a
criminal, so the writer makes her completely powerless
because she has no one to defend her. However, Dick
is ‘suddenly sorry’ at the end, which shows the reader
that he wants her forgiveness, so maybe she does
have some power.
Level 1
Simple,
limited
comment
1–5 marks
Shows simple, limited
evaluation:
• Makes a simple, limited
response to the focus of
the statement
• Shows limited
understanding of writer’s
methods
• Selects simple, limited
textual reference(s)
• Makes simple, limited
evaluative comment(s) on
effect(s) on reader
I do think that Dick’s anger is unfair because Mary just
used some water and when he finds out it says he
looked at her ‘as if she had committed a crime.’ This is
mean because she only wanted to cool herself down so
she isn’t a criminal. The writer’s use of the word ‘crime’
shows that he thinks she has done something really
bad. It does say that he is ‘suddenly sorry’ at the end
which shows that he feels bad.
Level 0
No marks
Nothing to reward.
Note:
• Reference to the writer’s methods may be implicit without specific mention of the writer.
Similarly, the evaluative ‘I do/I don’t agree’ may be implicit.
In both these cases credit should be given according to the quality of what is written.
• If a student writes only about language outside of the given lines, the response should be
placed in either Level 1 or Level 2, according to the quality of what is written.
AO4 content may include the evaluation of ideas such as:
• Dick’s reaction to Mary’s water use seen through the metaphorical phrase ‘his face darkened’,
suggesting that his anger changed/possessed him
• the way Dick looks at Mary ‘in incredulous horror’ and the simile ‘as if she had committed a crime’ to
show how extreme his anger is
• the increasing intensity of Dick’s anger, emphasised by his attempts to keep calm contrasted with
the short, exclamatory sentences: ‘Listen to me!’
• Mary’s desperation for rain, presented in her positioning on the ‘verandah’ as she ‘watched the
implacable sky for signs of rain’ makes Dick’s anger seem more unfair
• Dick’s repetition of the phrase ‘wasting it’ representing Dick’s desperation and struggle
• the flashback describing the effort of collecting the water, emphasised through the verbs ‘shouting’,
‘yelling’ and ‘straining’ as a justification for Dick’s anger
• Mary seeing a new side of her husband, shown through the revelation that this is ‘a voice he had
never before used to her’
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
15
• the narrative shift to Mary’s perspective at the end to describe her ‘suffering these hardships’, with
the use of a plural implying that there are numerous problems in the relationship
• Dick’s sudden regret, described as ‘another of those little scenes that comforted and soothed her’,
suggesting that Mary enjoys Dick’s guilt, giving her power
• the listing of ‘he apologising, blaming himself, and she forgiving him’ implying that this is a routine
for them that shifts the power balance.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
16
0 5 A magazine has asked for contributions for their creative writing section.
Either
Write a description of a very hot place as suggested by this picture:
or
Write a story about a disagreement.
(24 marks for content and organisation
16 marks for technical accuracy)
[40 marks]
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
17
AO5 Content and Organisation
Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, selecting and adapting tone, style and register for
different forms, purposes and audiences.
Organise information and ideas, using structural and grammatical features to support coherence and
cohesion of texts.
Level Skills descriptors
Level 4
19–24 marks
Compelling,
Convincing
Communication
Upper
Level 4
22–24
marks
Content
• Communication is convincing and compelling
• Tone, style and register are assuredly matched to purpose and
audience
• Extensive and ambitious vocabulary with sustained crafting of
linguistic devices
Organisation
• Varied and inventive use of structural features
• Writing is compelling, incorporating a range of convincing and
complex ideas
• Fluently linked paragraphs with seamlessly integrated discourse
markers
Lower
Level 4
19–21
marks
Content
• Communication is convincing
• Tone, style and register are convincingly matched to purpose and
audience
• Extensive vocabulary with conscious crafting of linguistic devices
Organisation
• Varied and effective structural features
• Writing is highly engaging with a range of developed complex
ideas
• Consistently coherent use of paragraphs with integrated discourse
markers
Level 3
13–18 marks
Consistent,
Clear
Communication
Upper
Level 3
16–18
marks
Content
• Communication is consistently clear
• Tone, style and register are clearly and consistently matched to
purpose and audience
• Increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and phrasing, chosen for
effect with a range of successful linguistic devices
Organisation
• Effective use of structural features
• Writing is engaging, using a range of clear, connected ideas
• Coherent paragraphs with integrated discourse markers
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
18
Lower
Level 3
13–15
marks
Content
• Communication is generally clear
• Tone, style and register are generally matched to purpose and
audience
• Vocabulary clearly chosen for effect and appropriate use of
linguistic devices
Organisation
• Usually effective use of structural features
• Writing is engaging, with a range of connected ideas
• Usually coherent paragraphs with range of discourse markers
Level 2
7–12 marks
Some successful
Communication
Upper
Level 2
10–12
marks
Content
• Communicates with some sustained success
• Some sustained attempt to match tone, style and register to
purpose and audience
• Conscious use of vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices
Organisation
• Some use of structural features
• Increasing variety of linked and relevant ideas
• Some use of paragraphs and some use of discourse markers
Lower
Level 2
7–9
marks
Content
• Communicates with some success
• Attempts to match tone, style and register to purpose and
audience
• Begins to vary vocabulary with some use of linguistic devices
Organisation
• Attempts to use structural features
• Some linked and relevant ideas
• Attempt to write in paragraphs with some discourse markers, not
always appropriate
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
19
Level 1
1–6 marks
Simple, Limited
Communication
Upper
Level 1
4–6
marks
Content
• Communicates simply
• Simple awareness of matching tone, style and register to purpose
and audience
• Simple vocabulary; simple linguistic devices
Organisation
• Evidence of simple structural features
• One or two relevant ideas, simply linked
• Random paragraph structure
Lower
Level 1
1–3
marks
Content
• Limited communication
• Occasional sense of matching tone, style and register to purpose
and audience
• Simple vocabulary
Organisation
• Limited or no evidence of structural features
• One or two unlinked ideas
• No paragraphs
Level 0
No marks
Students will not have offered any meaningful writing to assess.
Nothing to reward.
PMTMARK SCHEME – GCSE ENGLISH LANGUAGE – 8700/1 – JUNE 2024
20
AO6 Technical Accuracy
Students must use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with
accurate spelling and punctuation. (This requirement must constitute 20% of the marks for each
specification as a whole.)
Level Skills descriptors
Level 4
13–16 marks
• Sentence demarcation is consistently secure and consistently accurate
• Wide range of punctuation is used with a high level of accuracy
• Uses a full range of appropriate sentence forms for effect
• Uses Standard English consistently and appropriately with secure control of
complex grammatical structures
• High level of accuracy in spelling, including ambitious vocabulary
• Extensive and ambitious use of vocabulary
Level 3
9–12 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and mostly accurate
• Range of punctuation is used, mostly with success
• Uses a variety of sentence forms for effect
• Mostly uses Standard English appropriately with mostly controlled grammatical
structures
• Generally accurate spelling, including complex and irregular words
• Increasingly sophisticated use of vocabulary
Level 2
5–8 marks
• Sentence demarcation is mostly secure and sometimes accurate
• Some control of a range of punctuation
• Attempts a variety of sentence forms
• Some use of Standard English with some control of agreement
• Some accurate spelling of more complex words
• Varied use of vocabulary
Level 1
1–4 marks
• Occasional use of sentence demarcation
• Some evidence of conscious punctuation
• Simple range of sentence forms
• Occasional use of Standard English with limited control of agreement
• Accurate basic spelling
• Simple use of vocabulary
Level 0
No marks
Students’ spelling, punctuation etc is sufficiently poor to prevent understanding or
meaning.
PMT