Mark Scheme (Results)
June 2024
Pearson Edexcel International GCSE
in English Language (4EA1)
Paper 02: Poetry and Prose Texts and Imaginative
Writing
PMT2
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest
awarding body. We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic,
vocational, occupational and specific programmes for employers. For further
information visit our qualifications websites at www.edexcel.com or
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details
on our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus.
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim
is to help everyone progress in their lives through education. We believe
in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they are in the
world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, and by working
across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international
reputation for our commitment to high standards and raising achievement
through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can help you
and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk
June 2024
P73895
Publications Code 4EA1_02_2406_MS
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2024
PMT3
General Marking Guidance
• All candidates must receive the same treatment. Examiners must
mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the
last.
• Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be
rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than
penalised for omissions.
• Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme not
according to their perception of where the grade boundaries may
lie.
• There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme
should be used appropriately.
• All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded.
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the
answer matches the mark scheme. Examiners should also be
prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not
worthy of credit according to the mark scheme.
• Where some judgement is required, mark schemes will provide the
principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification may be
limited.
• When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the
mark scheme to a candidate’s response, a senior examiner must
be consulted before a mark is given.
• Crossed out work should be marked unless the candidate has
replaced it with an alternate response.
• Plans in the lined response area of the question paper/answer
booklet should not be marked unless no other response to the
question has been provided. This applies whether the plan is
crossed out or not.
Specific Marking Guidance
When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners should consult both the
indicative content and the associated marking grid(s). When using a levels-
based mark scheme, the ‘best fit’ approach should be used.
• Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches
the answer and place it in that level.
• The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality
of the answer and will be modified according to how securely all bullet
points are displayed at that level.
• Indicative content is exactly that – they are factual points that
candidates are likely to use to construct their answer.
• It is possible for an answer to be constructed without mentioning some
or all of these points, as long as they provide alternative responses to
the indicative content that fulfils the requirements of the question. It is
PMT4
the examiner’s responsibility to apply their professional judgement to
the candidate’s response in determining if the answer fulfils the
requirements of the question.
Placing a mark within a level
• Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches
the answer and place it in that level. The mark awarded within the level
will be decided based on the quality of the answer and will be modified
according to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that level.
• In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply.
Candidates will be placed in the level that best describes their answer
according to the descriptors in that level. Marks will be awarded
towards the top or bottom of that level depending on how they have
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points.
• If the candidate’s answer meets the requirements fully, markers should
be prepared to award full marks within the level. The top mark in the
level is used for work that is as good as can realistically be expected
within that level.
AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and interpreting
information, ideas and perspectives.
AO2 Understand and analyse how writers use linguistic and structural
devices to achieve their effects.
AO4 Communicate effectively and imaginatively, adapting form, tone
and register of writing for specific purposes and audiences.
AO5 Write clearly, using a range of vocabulary and sentence
structures, with appropriate paragraphing and accurate spelling,
grammar and punctuation.
PMT5
SECTION A: Reading
Question
Number
Indicative content
1 Reward responses that explain how the writer presents the importance of
traditional Indian culture.
Responses may include the following points about how the narrator
presents the cultural experience with the girl:
• repetition of the idea that the girl is ‘unknown’ creates a feeling of mystery
about this cultural experience
• there is an implication about how work and wealth are approached in the
culture of India in the suggestion that the unknown girl is young (being a
‘girl’ rather than a woman), working in the ‘evening’ and working for only ‘a
few rupees’
• the writer repeatedly emphasises the actions of the girl, showing interest in
what she contributes to the experience, and creates a verb from the
traditional art of henna to show its significance: ‘is hennaing my hand’
• the writer shows a fascination about the girl’s background, youth and
softness: she is a ‘girl’ (rather than a woman), with a ‘satin-peach knee’
• the writer feels admiration for the traditional skill and knowledge the girl
demonstrates: ‘which she steadies with hers’, ‘very deftly’
• the writer is impressed by the creativity and beauty of the henna tradition,
as is seen in her description of the process of the work: ‘She squeezes a
wet brown line/from a nozzle’, ‘icing my hand’, ‘a peacock spreads its
lines/across my palm’, ‘I have new brown veins’, ‘soft as a snail trail/the
amber bird beneath’
• the repetition of the application of this traditional material creates a sense
of peace and purpose in the poem, which creates an almost dream-like
state: ‘float up in balloons’, ‘Now the furious streets/are hushed’
• the description of the henna pattern demonstrates the admiration the writer
has for the creativity and beauty of the outcome of the work: ‘a peacock
spreads its lines/across my palm’, ‘I have new brown veins’, ‘soft as a snail
trail/the amber bird beneath’
• the description of the peacock henna pattern connects the reader to Indian
culture as this bird has legendary and religious significance in Indian
traditions: ‘a peacock spreads its lines/across my palm’, ‘soft as a snail
trail/the amber bird beneath’
• the writer suggests that the henna pattern is symbolic of traditional India,
which is creative and should be protected: ‘very deftly/an unknown girl/is
hennaing my hand’, ‘I am clinging/to these firm peacock lines’
• the writer feels a sense of loss after the experience is over, suggesting a
connection to a cultural tradition that is being lost: ‘It will fade in a week’
• the ending of the poem suggests that the writer yearns for a more
traditional India: ‘I’ll lean across a country/with my hands
outstretched/longing for the unknown girl’
• the writer’s connections to the mysterious ‘unknown girl’ are linked to her
cultural experience of India: ‘I’ll lean across a country/with my hands
outstretched/longing for the unknown girl’.
PMT6
Responses may include the following points about how the narrator
presents feelings about the place:
• the writer begins the poem with the setting of the ‘evening bazaar/studded
with neon’, helping to identify how well she remembers this experience
• there is a contrast between the idea of the setting being a traditional
marketplace, ‘bazaar’, and the modern ‘neon’ lights which light it
• the evening setting of the bazaar creates a sense of it being dusk, or dark,
and the descriptions of light demonstrate a possible feeling of mystery:
‘studded with neon’
• the traditional cultural context of the experience is emphasised through the
description of the place: ‘evening bazaar’, ‘for a few rupees’, ‘my shadow-
stitched kameez’
• the writer only shows the unknown girl in this place and doing her job,
demonstrating that her identity is closely linked to it
• the writer uses colours to describe the place and create a sensual
experience of it: ‘studded with neon’, ‘wet brown line’, ‘satin-peach knee’,
‘Colours leave the street’, ‘amber’
• sensual descriptions are also used to show the feeling of touch connected to
the experience in the setting: ‘studded’, ‘she steadies with hers’, ‘canopy
me’, ‘I’ll scrape off’
• this is also seen in the sense of stillness and peace associated with the
setting: ‘which she steadies with hers’, ‘a little air catches/my shadow-
stitched kameez’, ‘float up in balloons’, ‘streets are hushed’
• the writer’s description of the traditional, peaceful setting of the bazaar is
contrasted with a harsher, more negative setting of the more ‘westernised’
India: ‘Dummies in shop-fronts/tilt and stare/with their Western perms’
• this is also seen in the way the bazaar is presented as an outdoor setting,
perhaps symbolising freedom, while the more ‘westernised’ settings are
connected with the sense of being indoors: ‘shop-fronts’, ‘curtain cloth’,
‘sofa cloth/canopy me’
• there is a suggestion of danger and anger associated with the description of
a place which has ‘people who cling/to the sides of a train’ and ‘furious
streets’
• like the unknown girl, the writer’s identity is closely connected with the
setting: ‘When India appears and reappears/I’ll lean across a country/with
my hands outstretched’
• the idea of the memory of India returning to the writer shows the impact
the culture and place has had on her: ‘When India appears and reappears’
• the writer’s longing for a more traditional India is seen in the ending of the
poem: ‘I’ll lean across a country/with my hands outstretched/longing for the
unknown girl’.
Responses may include the following points about the use of language and
structure:
• vocabulary is used to reflect Indian culture and the significance of tradition,
demonstrating the writer’s acknowledgement of and respect for it: ‘bazaar’,
‘hennaing’, ‘rupees’, ‘kameez’
• the description ‘studded with neon’ creates a sense of texture and depth to
the cultural experience through the connection to touch and colour
• descriptions of colour and light create a significant sensual experience:
‘studded with neon’, ‘wet brown line’, ‘satin-peach knee’, ‘Colours leave the
street’, ‘new brown veins’
• the writer repeats the actions of the unknown girl: ‘an unknown girl/is
PMT7
hennaing my hand’. This repetition and the alliteration places emphasis on
this tradition and its cultural significance for women
• the writer’s use of onomatopoeia has a sensory effect, enhancing the vivid
traditional experience, creating a sense of the intricacies of it: ‘squeezes’,
‘hushed’, ‘scrape’
• metaphors show the creativity and familiarity of this cultural tradition: ‘She
is icing my hand’, ‘curtain cloth/and sofa cloth/canopy me’
• the description of ‘my shadow-stitched kameez’ suggests that the writer
feels a personal connection to the culture; ‘shadow-stitched’ links what she
is wearing to the delicate hand-crafting of the henna image
• the writer is literally touched by the ‘evening bazaar’ and Indian culture, as
the peacock is one of the national symbols of India, seen in the description
of how ‘a peacock spreads its lines/across my palm’
• short sentences are used to create emphasis on the place and the
traditional experience: ‘Colours leave the street/float up in balloons’, ‘I have
new brown veins’, ‘Now the furious streets/are hushed’; these contrast with
longer sentences used as a refrain: ‘In the evening bazaar … an unknown
girl/is hennaing my hand’
• alliteration is used to emphasise the colour and texture of the cultural
experience: ‘shadow-stitched’, ‘Colours’, ‘curtain cloth/and sofa
cloth/canopy me’
• personification contrasts the traditional colour and texture of India with the
more ‘manufactured’, ‘westernised’ India, creating a negative view of this
more ‘westernised’ culture: ‘Dummies in shop-fronts/tilt and stare’
• this is reinforced with the personification of the setting and the suggestion
that there could be anger at change: ‘Now the furious streets/are hushed’.
The ‘furious streets’ could suggest frenzy or turbulence (metaphor)
• structure emphasises the juxtaposition of ‘westernised’ and traditional
India: ‘In the evening bazaar/studded with neon … is hennaing my hand’,
‘with their Western perms/Banners for Miss India 1993’
• the verb ‘cling’ is used to demonstrate the feeling the writer has that she
wants to hold tightly to the cultural traditions of India: ‘I am clinging/to
these firm peacock lines’. This is emphasised by the simile ‘like people who
cling/to the sides of a train’
• the simile ‘soft as a snail trail’ suggests something subtle and gentle, and
the image of the snail could signify traditions which are (or should be) slow
to change
• there is a sad tone in the idea that ‘It will fade within a week’, as the henna
fading could be symbolic of tradition fading, or of her leaving India and
losing her link to it
• the personification of India at the end of the poem and the description of
the writer leaning ‘across a country’ as if it were a person helps the reader
to feel as connected to the culture as the writer does: ‘When India appears
and reappears’
• the movement from present tense in the poem to the future is positive, with
the use of the adverb, ‘when’, creating a feeling that positive action is
happening: ‘When India appears and reappears/I’ll lean across a
country/with my hands outstretched’
• the importance of tradition and culture is emphasised by the use of the verb
‘longing’, which creates a feeling of the unattainable. This leaves the reader
with a sense of sadness created by change.
Reward all valid points.
PMT8
Question 1
Level Mark AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and
interpreting information, ideas and perspectives
(12 marks)
0 No rewardable material.
Level 1
Limited
Basic
1-3 • Basic understanding of the text.
• Limited selection of information/ideas/perspectives.
• Limited use of references.
Level 2 Some
Developing
4-6 • Some understanding of the text.
• Selection and interpretation of
information/ideas/perspectives is valid, but not
developed.
• The selection of references is valid, but not developed.
Level 3 Clear
Relevant
7-9 • Sound understanding of the text.
• Selection and interpretation of
information/ideas/perspectives is appropriate and
relevant to the points being made.
• The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to
the points being made.
Level 4
Detailed
Sustained
10-12 • Sustained understanding of the text.
• Selection and interpretation of
information/ideas/perspectives is appropriate, detailed
and fully supports the points being made.
• The selection of references is detailed, appropriate
and fully supports the points being made.
PMT9
Level Mark AO2 Understand and analyse how writers use linguistic and
structural devices to achieve their effects
(18 marks)
0 No rewardable material.
Level 1
Limited
Basic
1-3 • Limited identification of language and/or structural devices.
• Limited selection of textual references.
• Basic and simple comment on the effect of language and/or
structure.
Level 2 Some
Developing
4-6 • Some identification/selection of language and/or structural
devices
• Some accurate textual references.
• Some developing comment on the effect of language
and/or
structure.
Level 3 Clear
Relevant
Explanatory
7-10 • Clear and relevant selection of language and structural
devices.
• Relevant and generally appropriate use of textual
references.
• Clear explanations of the effects of language and structure.
Level 4
Thorough
Confident
Exploratory
11-14 • Thorough and confident selection of language and
structural devices.
• Confident and detailed use of textual references.
• Detailed exploration of the effects of language and
structure.
Level 5
Discriminating
Perceptive
Analytical
15-18 • Subtle and discriminating selection of language and
structural devices.
• Discriminating and assured use of textual references.
• Perceptive analysis of the effects of language and structure.
PMT10
Section B: Imaginative Writing
Refer to the writing assessment grids at the end of this section when
marking Questions 2, 3 and 4.
Question
Number
Indicative content
2 Purpose: to write a real or imagined piece about a time a person
decorated something. This may involve a range of approaches,
including: description, anecdote, speech, narrative, literary techniques.
Audience: the writing is for a general readership. Candidates can
choose to write for an audience of adults or young people.
Form: the response may be narrative, descriptive or a monologue.
There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
development of points and a conclusion. Some candidates may
intentionally adapt their language and style to their audience by using,
for example, a more informal or colloquial approach. Candidates may
introduce some literary elements.
Responses may:
• use the poem as inspiration
• explain what was being decorated, the reasons why the
narrator/writer was decorating it, how the person and others felt
about it and what the decoration looked like
• describe ideas, events, settings and characters
• use appropriate techniques for creative writing: vocabulary,
imagery, language techniques
• use a voice that attempts to make the piece interesting and/or
believable to the chosen audience
• be written in a register and style appropriate for the chosen
form, which may include colloquial elements, dialogue within
description or narrative, or a sustained single voice in a
monologue.
The best-fit approach
An answer may not always satisfy every one of the assessment criteria
for a particular level in order to receive a mark within that level range,
since on individual criteria the answer may meet the descriptor for a
higher or lower mark range. The best-fit approach should be used to
determine the mark which corresponds most closely to the overall
quality of the response.
PMT10
Question
Number
Indicative content
3 Purpose: to write a real or imagined story with the title ‘A Perfect
Place’. This may involve a range of approaches, including: description,
anecdote, speech, literary techniques.
Audience: the writing is for a general readership. Candidates can
choose to write for an audience of adults or young people.
Form: the response may be narrative, descriptive or a monologue.
There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
development of points and a conclusion. Some candidates may
intentionally adapt their language and style to their audience by using,
for example, a more informal or colloquial approach. Candidates may
introduce some literary elements.
Responses may:
• describe the perfect place, which could be real or imagined: for
example, a holiday destination, a place to live, a place to work or
a place such as a planet or imagined world
• give examples of the features of the place and the impact of
these: for example, a holiday destination which has extremes of
climate, historical or cultural significance, or a place to live which
has positives like peace, scenery, range of activities, people or a
place to work which has benefits and perks
• describe ideas, events, settings and characters
• use appropriate techniques for creative writing: vocabulary,
imagery, language techniques
• use a voice that attempts to make the piece interesting and/or
believable to the chosen audience
• be written in a register and style appropriate for the chosen
form, which may include colloquial elements, dialogue within
description or narrative, or a sustained single voice in a
monologue.
The best-fit approach
An answer may not always satisfy every one of the assessment criteria
for a particular level in order to receive a mark within that level range,
since on individual criteria the answer may meet the descriptor for a
higher or lower mark range. The best-fit approach should be used to
determine the mark which corresponds most closely to the overall
quality of the response.
PMT11
Question
Number
Indicative content
4 Purpose: to write a real or imagined story that begins ‘Our eyes
suddenly met’. This may involve a range of approaches, including:
description, anecdote, speech, literary techniques.
Audience: the writing is for a general readership. Candidates can
choose to write for an audience of adults or young people.
Form: the response may be narrative, descriptive or a monologue.
There should be clear organisation and structure with an introduction,
development of points and a conclusion. Some candidates may
intentionally adapt their language and style to their audience by using,
for example, a more informal or colloquial approach. Candidates may
introduce some literary elements.
Responses may:
• use the images to inspire writing
• create a character and a scenario about something or someone
• describe ideas, events, settings and characters
• use appropriate techniques for creative writing: vocabulary,
imagery, language techniques
• use a voice that attempts to make the piece interesting and/or
believable to the chosen audience
• be written in a register and style appropriate for the chosen
form, which may include colloquial elements, dialogue within
description or narrative, or a sustained single voice in a
monologue.
The best-fit approach
An answer may not always satisfy every one of the assessment criteria
for a particular level in order to receive a mark within that level range,
since on individual criteria the answer may meet the descriptor for a
higher or lower mark range. The best-fit approach should be used to
determine the mark which corresponds most closely to the overall
quality of the response.
PMT12
Writing assessment grids for Questions 2, 3 and 4
Questions 2, 3 and 4
Level Mark AO4 Communicate effectively and imaginatively, adapting form, tone
and register of writing for specific purposes and audiences.
0 No rewardable material.
Level 1 1–3 • Communication is at a basic level, and limited in clarity.
• Little awareness is shown of the purpose of the writing and the
intended reader.
• Little awareness of form, tone and register.
Level 2 4–7 • Communicates in a broadly appropriate way.
• Shows some grasp of the purpose and of the expectations/
requirements of the intended reader.
• Straightforward use of form, tone and register.
Level 3 8–11 • Communicates clearly.
• Shows a clear sense of purpose and understanding of the
expectations/requirements of the intended reader.
• Appropriate use of form, tone and register.
Level 4 12–15 • Communicates successfully.
• A secure realisation of purpose and the
expectations/requirements of the intended reader.
• Effective use of form, tone and register.
Level 5 16–18 • Communication is perceptive and subtle.
• Task is sharply focused on purpose and the expectations/
requirements of the intended reader.
• Sophisticated use of form, tone and register.
PMT13
Questions 2, 3 and 4
Level Mark AO5 Write clearly, using a range of vocabulary and sentence
structures, with appropriate paragraphing and accurate spelling,
grammar and punctuation.
0 No rewardable material.
Level 1 1–2 • Expresses information and ideas, with limited use of structural
and grammatical features.
• Uses basic vocabulary, often misspelt.
• Uses punctuation with basic control, creating undeveloped, often
repetitive, sentence structures.
Level 2 3–4 • Expresses and orders information and ideas; uses paragraphs and
a range of structural and grammatical features.
• Uses some correctly spelt vocabulary, e.g. words with regular
patterns such as prefixes, suffixes, double consonants.
• Uses punctuation with some control, creating a range of sentence
structures, including coordination and subordination.
Level 3 5–7 • Develops and connects appropriate information and ideas;
structural and grammatical features and paragraphing make the
meaning clear.
• Uses a varied vocabulary and spells words containing irregular
patterns correctly.
• Uses accurate and varied punctuation, adapting sentence
structures as appropriate.
Level 4 8–10 • Manages information and ideas, with structural and grammatical
features used cohesively and deliberately across the text.
• Uses a wide, selective vocabulary with only occasional spelling
errors.
• Positions a range of punctuation for clarity, managing sentence
structures for deliberate effect.
Level 5 11–12 • Manipulates complex ideas, utilising a range of structural and
grammatical features to support coherence and cohesion.
• Uses extensive vocabulary strategically; rare spelling errors do
not detract from overall meaning.
• Punctuates writing with accuracy to aid emphasis and precision,
using a range of sentence structures accurately and selectively to
achieve particular effects.
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom
PMT