National 5 English
Portfolio–writing and
Performance–spoken language
assessment tasks



 Valid from session 2024–25 and until further notice.




This edition: May 2024 (version 3.0)

The information in this publication may be reproduced to support SQA qualifications. This
publication must not be reproduced for commercial or trade purposes. This material is for
use by teachers and lecturers.

© Scottish Qualifications Authority 2012, 2017, 2023, 2024
Contents
Introduction                                               1

Marking instructions                                       2

Instructions for candidates: portfolio–writing             3

Instructions for candidates: performance–spoken language   7

Recording documentation                                    9
Introduction
This document contains instructions for candidates for the National 5 English portfolio–
writing and performance–spoken language, and recording documentation for the
performance–spoken language. It must be read in conjunction with the course
specification.

The portfolio–writing is worth 30 marks. It consists of one piece, which is marked out of
15. This is then doubled to give a mark out of 30. This is 30% of the overall marks for the
course assessment.

The performance–spoken language is set by centres within SQA guidelines and conducted
under some supervision and control. The performance–spoken language is assessed on an
achieved/not achieved basis. It is a compulsory requirement for a course award in National
5 English.

These are two of four course assessment components. The other components are a Reading
for Understanding, Analysis and Evaluation question paper and a Critical Reading question
paper.

The instructions for candidates can be printed and edited, as appropriate, to suit the task
set by centres.

This document also contains a checklist for assessors which can be used to record the
results awarded for the performance–spoken language.




Version 3.0                                                                       1
Marking instructions
The marking instructions for the National 5 English portfolio–writing and performance–
spoken language can be found in the course specification.




Version 3.0                                                                    2
Instructions for candidates: portfolio–
writing
This assessment applies to the portfolio–writing for National 5 English.

This portfolio–writing is worth 30 marks. The marks contribute 30% of the overall marks for
the course assessment.

It assesses the following skills, knowledge and understanding.

Write, with sufficient technical accuracy, in one of two forms:

 broadly creative
 broadly discursive

Your teacher or lecturer will let you know how the assessment will be carried out and any
required conditions for doing it.

In this assessment, you have to:

Produce one piece of writing of no more than 1,000 words. Your piece of writing must be
broadly creative or broadly discursive. Your writing must have satisfactory technical
accuracy. It may contain errors, but these must not be significant. Paragraphing, sentence
construction, spelling and punctuation must be sufficiently accurate so that meaning is
clear at the first reading.

You are expected to do most of the work on your own but your teacher or lecturer can
help you to choose the focus and type of writing that suits you best. The first draft of your
writing must be done in class under the supervision of your teacher or lecturer.

Portfolio–writing process
You must follow this process for this assessment:

 choose the focus and type of writing (with support of teacher or lecturer)
 explore and develop your idea (this can involve research and note-taking, as
  appropriate)
 plan the writing (outline and structure)
 complete the first draft in class under supervision (with notes, outline plan, research
  and/or ICT, as appropriate)
 think about the feedback from your teacher or lecturer
 complete the final piece under some supervision and control

You can gain up to 15 marks for the piece of writing. Your mark will be doubled to achieve
the 30% weighting.




Version 3.0                                                                       3
Creative writing may include:

 a personal or reflective essay
 a piece of prose fiction (for example short story, episode from a novel)
 a poem or set of thematically linked poems
 a dramatic script (for example scene, monologue, sketch)

Discursive writing may include:

 an argumentative essay
 a persuasive essay
 a report
 a piece of transactional or informative writing

The following are descriptions of types of writing, which may help you in selecting your
piece of writing.


Creative writing
Personal
Personal writing focuses on, for example, a specific event, experience, situation and your
reactions to it or them.


Reflective
Reflective writing demonstrates your thinking on, and reactions to, an idea, concept, or
experience.


Prose fiction
Prose fiction might be a complete short story or an extract from a longer piece (for
example an opening section). It is likely to include, for example, the establishment of a
setting, some characterisation, narrative, conflict, resolution.


Poetry
If you choose poetry, only one poem is required; however, you can submit a series of
thematically linked poems. If you submit a collection of poems, they will be assessed as
one piece. You should not submit an introduction, or commentary on your poem(s). There
is no minimum length for poetry.


Dramatic script
A dramatic script can be a complete scene or extract, intended for the stage, or for film or
television. It can involve a small number of characters or can be a monologue. You can
include dramatic techniques such as stage directions, use of lighting, sound.




Version 3.0                                                                      4
Discursive writing
Persuasive
The aim of persuasive writing is to persuade the reader towards the writer’s point of view
or purpose. It usually focuses on a single topic or issue and carries a sense of conviction,
commitment or belief through the use of language to create an appropriate tone.


Argumentative
Argumentative writing presents an issue or topic in such a way that a line of thought is
developed which deals with two or more points of view.


Report
Report writing contains information which is relevant to a chosen topic or issue. It has an
appropriate sequence and structure. The material drawn from sources must be recast and
paraphrased in your own words. You may also use headings, and a lettering, numbering, or
bullet-point system to indicate sections.


Transactional or informative
The aim with this type of writing is to convey information on a chosen topic, for example a
film or concert review, a biography.


General guidance
There is no time limit for the portfolio–writing assessment. However, the first draft must
be completed in class under supervision. Your teacher or lecturer will tell you how long
you have to do this. You must have completed the first draft in class to allow submission of
your final piece.

There are no restrictions on the resources you can access. You are allowed to take notes
and a plan with you when you complete your first draft in class.

Your submitted piece of writing must not carry any comments, marks or grades from your
teacher or lecturer.

Your teacher or lecturer may provide reasonable assistance, which could include
supporting you in choosing a focus and type of writing, and advice and guidance on a first
draft.

Once you have submitted your final piece of writing, this must not be changed or altered.

Before you begin work on your portfolio–writing, it is important that you read SQA’s
booklet Your Coursework which provides you with information about the rules around
coursework, including authenticity and plagiarism.




Version 3.0                                                                      5
Taking an essay from an internet site or submitting work that is not your own (this could be
another person's work or work taken from a generative artificial intelligence source) is
plagiarism. The following are also examples of plagiarism:

 copying and pasting from the internet without citing the source
 copying directly from a textbook without citing the source
 omitting quotation marks from quotations
 using software such as generative artificial intelligence

Your portfolio–writing must be written in your own words unless you are quoting from a
referenced source.

You must acknowledge all sources consulted for discursive writing in footnotes or in a
reference list at the end of the piece of writing. You must give specific details of the
sources consulted.

Where there is doubt over the authenticity of a piece of writing it will not be accepted for
portfolio submission.

You must complete and sign the portfolio–writing declaration on the flyleaf to confirm that
the writing is completely your own work.




Version 3.0                                                                       6
Instructions for candidates:
performance–spoken language
This assessment applies to the performance–spoken language for
National 5 English.

The performance–spoken language is assessed on an achieved/not achieved basis. It is a
compulsory requirement for a course award in National 5 English.

It assesses the following skills, knowledge and understanding:

 talking, showing the ability to include detailed content and language, to structure
  spoken language in a clear way, and to use some appropriate non-verbal
  communication
 listening, showing, through contributions to discussion, or by answering questions, that
  effective listening to detailed language has taken place

Your teacher or lecturer will let you know if there are any specific conditions for doing this
assessment.

In this assessment, you have to do at least one of the following spoken language activities:

 Take part in a group discussion, or discussion-based activity, to which you contribute
  relevant ideas, opinions, or information, using detailed language. You must take
  account of what others say and stay focused on the topic or task.

   A discussion might involve talking in a pair, or a small group, about a topic chosen by
   you or by your teacher or lecturer. It is likely that the topic will be linked to other
   aspects of the course, for example the exploration of Scottish texts or other literature
   or research carried out for a portfolio–writing piece.

   Or

 Prepare and present a spoken presentation. The presentation must be detailed in
  content and must be structured in a clear and relevant way. You must answer questions
  from the audience at some point in the presentation.

   A presentation might involve an individual or a small group preparing and delivering a
   presentation on an agreed topic to an audience. The audience might be a class or a
   small group. As above, it is likely that the topic will be linked to other aspects of the
   course.




Version 3.0                                                                       7
General guidance
There are no restrictions on the resources you can access. You may undertake, for example
research activities, reading and annotating texts and/or preparing notes.

Your teacher or lecturer may provide reasonable assistance, which could include choosing
or advising on topics for discussion, prompting, and asking questions at some point in your
presentation.

If you are taking part in a group discussion, you should remember to:

 prepare for the discussion in order that you can make detailed contributions
 contribute detailed and relevant ideas and/or information
 demonstrate, through your responses, that you have listened to the ideas and/or
  information contributed by others in the group
 take account of, allow, and be respectful of, the contributions of others
 develop your own views and opinions in light of the contributions of others
 take turns and acknowledge the role of the chair (if appropriate) using aspects of non-
  verbal communication

If you are delivering a presentation, you should remember to:

 prepare detailed content for the presentation (including visual aids, where
  appropriate)
 structure the presentation in a clear way
 employ detailed language throughout the presentation
 use aspects of non-verbal communication
 be prepared to answer questions

Note: aspects of non-verbal communication might include facial expression, emphasis,
gesture and/or eye contact.




Version 3.0                                                                      8
Recording documentation
The following recording document for the performance–spoken language should be used by
assessors to record the result awarded to candidates.

In the case of assessment by observation or oral questioning, evidence should include
assessors’ comments and other relevant supporting evidence that shows clearly the basis
on which assessment judgements have been made.

Note: details of the evidence required for this assessment can be found in the ‘Course
assessment structure: performance–spoken language’ section of the course specification.




Version 3.0                                                                   9
National 5 English: performance–spoken language assessment checklist
 Candidate name:                                                      Activity:

 National 5 English: performance–spoken language
                                                                 Achieved/
 Aspect of performance                                           not          Assessor’s comments
                                                                 achieved
 Employs detailed and      Content
 relevant ideas and/or     Can contribute a range of detailed
 information using a       and relevant ideas, views, opinions
 structure appropriate     and/or information.
 to purpose and            Structure
 audience                  Spoken language is structured
                           effectively, and, where
                           appropriate, takes account of the
                           contributions of others.
                           Relevance
                           Attention to task, purpose and
                           audience is sustained.
 Communicates meaning      Choice and use of language
 effectively through the   Can select and use detailed spoken
 selection and use of      language that is appropriate to
 detailed spoken           purpose and audience.
 language                  Clarity and accuracy
                           Can employ appropriate spoken
                           language with sufficient clarity
                           and accuracy to ensure that
                           effective communication is
                           achieved.


Version 3.0                                                                                         10
                                                                Achieved/
 Aspect of performance                                          not         Assessor’s comments
                                                                achieved
 Uses aspects of           Can employ appropriate
 non-verbal                non-verbal features to assist
 communication             communication and/or meaning,
                           for example facial expression,
                           emphasis, gesture and/or eye
                           contact.

 Demonstrates listening    Can give relevant responses to the
 skills by responding to   contributions of others in group
 detailed spoken           discussions or in a series of
 language                  discussion-based activities.
                           Or
                           Can respond relevantly to
                           questions which follow, for
                           example, a presentation.


 Additional comments:




 Assessor name:                                   Assessor signature:                             Date:




Version 3.0                                                                                               11
Administrative information

Published:           May 2024 (version 3.0)




History of changes

  Version     Description of change                                             Date
  2.0         Updated to reflect portfolio–writing requirement reduced to       May 2023
              one piece of writing.
  3.0         Updated to reflect changes to conditions of assessment for the    May 2024
              portfolio–writing.




Security and confidentiality
This document can be used by practitioners in SQA approved centres for the assessment of
National Courses and not for any other purpose.



Copyright
This document may be reproduced in whole or in part for assessment purposes provided
that no profit is derived from reproduction and that, if reproduced in part, the source is
acknowledged. If it needs to be reproduced for any purpose other than assessment, it is
the centre’s responsibility to obtain copyright clearance.

Re-use for alternative purposes without the necessary copyright clearance may constitute
copyright infringement.




© Scottish Qualifications Authority 2012, 2017, 2023, 2024



Version 3.0                                                                      12
