                 General Certificate of Secondary Education
                                     2025


                       English Language
                                 Unit 4
               Personal or Creative Writing and
             Reading Literary and Non-fiction Texts
                                [GEN41]

                       TUESDAY 20 MAY, MORNING




                             MARK
                            SCHEME




14575.01 F
General Marking Instructions

A General Introduction to the Assessment of CCEA’s GCSE English Language

Introduction

Mark schemes are intended to ensure that the GCSE examinations are marked consistently and fairly.
The mark schemes provide markers with an indication of the nature and range of candidates’ responses
likely to be worthy of credit. They also set out the criteria against which marks are allocated to
candidates’ responses. The task-specific instructions should be read in conjunction with these general
marking instructions.

Assessment objectives

Below are the relevant assessment objectives for English Language Unit 4.

Reading AO3 Candidates must:

     (i)     read and understand texts, selecting material appropriate to purpose, collating from different
             sources and making comparisons and cross-referencing as appropriate;

     (ii) develop and sustain interpretations of writers’ ideas and perspectives; and

     (iii) explain and evaluate how writers use linguistic, structural and presentational features to
           achieve effects and engage and influence the reader.

Writing AO4 Candidates must:

     (i)     write to communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, using and adapting forms and
             selecting vocabulary appropriate to task and purpose in ways that engage the reader;

     (ii) organise information and ideas into structured and sequenced sentences, paragraphs and
          whole texts, using a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and overall
          coherence; and

     (iii) use a range of sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling,
           punctuation and grammar.

Quality of candidates’ responses

In assessing candidates’ work, examiners should be looking for a quality of response reflecting the level
of maturity which may reasonably be expected of a 16-year-old.

Flexibility in marking

Mark schemes are not intended to be totally prescriptive. No mark scheme can cover all the responses
which candidates may produce. In the event of unanticipated responses, examiners are expected to
use their professional judgement to assess their validity. If a response is particularly problematic, then
examiners should seek the guidance of their Supervising Examiner.

Positive marking

Examiners will be positive in their marking, giving appropriate credit for what candidates know,
understand and can do. Examiners should make use of the whole of the available mark range for any
particular question and be prepared to award full marks taking into consideration the time available and
the maturity of the candidature. Task-specific materials are indicative guides and are neither prescriptive
nor exhaustive.



14575.01 F                                              2                                        [Turn over
A mark of zero

This score should only be used where there is no creditworthy response.

The marking process

The required process, standard and style of marking will be the business of the Standardising Meeting.

The responses will be marked using positive assessment, crediting what has been achieved. The mark
schemes are designed to support this positive approach.

Pre-marked exemplar scripts will be made available to all examiners at the Standardising Meeting.
These ‘benchmark scripts’ will have been marked and annotated by the senior examining team prior to
each Standardising Meeting and should be used for reference throughout the marking period.

The relationship between tasks, mark schemes and Competence Level Strands

Every task has either:

     (a) a mark scheme that is built around a task-specific checklist, Competence Level (CL) Strands
         and a mark grid

The Competence Levels, which detail increasing levels of proficiency, are made up of three strands.
These are derived from the Assessment Objectives and each of the strands focuses on important
characteristics within the response. The role of each examiner is to identify positively what has been
achieved and then match each candidate’s level of proficiency to the appropriate descriptors.

Or

     (b) an individual task checklist tied to specific mark allocations




14575.01 F                                           3
                                     Section A: Personal/Creative Writing

Task 1

The Assessment Objectives

Writing (AO4)

     (i)     Write to communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, using and adapting forms and
             selecting vocabulary appropriate to task and purpose in ways that engage the reader.

     (ii) Organise information and ideas into structured and sequenced sentences, paragraphs and
          whole texts, using a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and
          coherence.

     (iii) Use a range of sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling,
           punctuation and grammar.

All are being assessed.

The examiner will be required to make two distinct assessments: one for Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii)
and a second assessment for Task 1(ii): Writing (iii).

The two required assessments

1    Each response will be assessed on the basis of a single reading and annotated using three
     e-marking tools: underlining, circling and wavy lining.

     At the end of the response insert a text box and the appropriate W stamp.

     The method and style of annotation:

     •       the underlining tool is used to indicate creditworthy material.

     •       the circling facility serves two purposes:

             (a) to highlight spelling mistakes with each error being circled only once - alot ...
                 happend

             (b) for indicating minor and/or occasional lapses in punctuation such as missing
                 apostrophes, commas and full stops – run’s/...two three or four/ ...to me it was not long
                 after....

     •       wavy lining will denote lapses in expression – for example – he seen yous threw the open
             door. Use the vertical option in the margin to indicate ongoing issues.




14575.01 F                                                4                                          [Turn over
2    Using the method and style of marking outlined on p. 4 in conjunction with the Competence
     Level (CL) Strands for Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii), the examiner will positively assess the
     features of that response.

     This process will be carried out in this order:

     (a) The examiner will carefully read and annotate the response.

     (b) The three Competence Level Strands that best match the candidate’s achievement will be
         noted.

     (c) Only after selecting and noting the three Competence Level Strands will the examiner turn to
         the mark grid to establish the mark to be awarded. Where the mark grid calls for an examiner
         judgement, the extent to which a candidate has met the overall requirements of the particular
         Competence Level will determine the mark to be awarded.

             Where a range of marks is available, the following procedure should be followed:
             •  where a two mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the response
                is mostly in the 'upper' half or 'lower' half of the achieved Competence Level and award
                either mark accordingly; and

             •   where a three or four mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the
                 response is mostly at the 'top', 'middle' or 'bottom' of the achieved Competence Level and
                 award the mark accordingly.

             In exceptional circumstances the standard of a candidate’s work might range across more than
             two strand levels. Such an eventuality is not covered by the mark grids. Apply the following
             mathematical rule in this case: Task 1(i) CL422 (totals 8; 4+2+2). This equates to CL332
             (totals 8) so the mark range for this response would be 27–30 marks for Task 1(i). The support
             of the Supervising Examiner could usefully be sought.




14575.01 F                                             5
Here is an example of this style of annotation in action for Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii) (this should be
read in conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p.10).


 The response is positively assessed against each of the three strands that make up the
 Competence Levels for Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii). Let’s assume it can best be summarised by
 the following descriptors:

       •     "Competent development; generally effective style" (Development and Style CL3)

       •     "Competent structuring; competent use of a range of structural and linguistic devices"
             (Structuring/Use of Linguistic and Structural Features CL3)

       •     "Straightforward sense of purpose; some appropriate use of vocabulary to engage the
             audience in a straightforward way" (Purpose and Audience CL2)


 These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the dialogue box for 1(i):



                   Wi + ii              332


 The next stage in the process is to check these 'strand scores' on the mark grid for
 Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii) on p. 11. This indicates a mark range of 27–30 marks. The examiner
 will consider whether the response is mostly at the ‘top’, ‘middle’ or ‘bottom’ of the achieved
 Competence Level Strands and award the appropriate mark accordingly.

 This score would then be entered against 1(i) in the scoring facility on the right side of the screen.




14575.01 F                                            6                                         [Turn over
Here is an example of this style of annotation in action for Task 1(ii): Writing (iii) (this should be read
in conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p.12).


 The response is positively assessed against each of the three strands that make up the Competence
 Level Strands for Task 1(ii): Writing (iii). Let’s assume it can best be summarised by the following
 descriptors:

       •     "Competent use of a variety of sentence structures, with increasingly accurate use of
             paragraphing" (Range of Sentence Structures CL3)

       •     "Generally secure use of grammar and punctuation to support intended meaning" (Use of
             Punctuation and Grammar CL3)

       •     "Increasingly accurate spelling of regular words with regular patterns" (Spelling CL3)

 These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the dialogue box for 1(ii):



                    Wiii             333


 The next stage in the process is to check these 'strand scores' across the mark grid for
 Task 1: Writing (iii) on p. 13. This indicates a score of 17/18 marks. The examiner will consider
 whether the response is mostly in the ‘upper’ half or ‘lower’ half of the achieved Competence Levels
 and award either mark accordingly.

 The selected score would then be entered against 1(ii) in the scoring facility on the right side of the
 screen.




14575.01 F                                            7
General Guidance on applying the Competence Level Strands

The first assessment: Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii)

The following guidance will help to highlight the extent to which a candidate has shaped the
response appropriately.

Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively.

     •       a handling of the task in such a way as to positively develop the audience’s interest;
     •       the use of a style that builds a positive relationship with the prescribed audience; and
     •       possible use of techniques to engage the prescribed audience.

Adapt form and vocabulary to task and purpose in ways that engage the specified
audience.

     •       to tailor the piece specifically for the prescribed audience;
     •       to use an appropriate tone that is designed to engage and sustain the audience’s attention;
             and
     •       to use vocabulary that is in keeping with the purpose of the task.

Organise information and ideas into structured, sequenced sentences, paragraphs and
whole texts.

     •       to create a logical progression with organisation of ideas to sustain the audience’s interest;
     •       to use engaging/challenging introductory and concluding paragraphs; and
     •       to use topic/link sentences for different paragraphs.

Use a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and overall
coherence.

     •       to vary sentence length for effect
     •       to use appropriate connectives; and
     •       to use rhetorical devices (such as the rule of three, questions, hyperbole) to develop interest/
             develop a rapport with the specified audience.

Credit any other valid strategies.




14575.01 F                                              8                                         [Turn over
The second assessment: Task 1: Writing (iii)

The following guidance will help to highlight the extent to which a candidate has shaped the response
appropriately. It offers guidance on how candidates, across all competence levels, may employ the skills
from Task 1: Writing (iii).

The range and effectiveness of sentence structures.

     •       the wider the range and the greater the degree of originality and control in structuring
             sentences, the more opportunity the candidate has to establish a positive rapport with the
             specified audience; and
     •       the more assured and varied the sentence structuring is, the more engaging the response is
             likely to be.

The use made of accurate punctuation and grammar.

     •       control of a variety of appropriate punctuation and accurate use of grammar to maintain
             interest. The greater the control and variation in the use of punctuation, the more engaging the
             response is likely to be.

The use made of accurate spelling.

     •       accuracy in spelling of words with both regular and irregular patterns.

Credit any other valid strategies.




14575.01 F                                              9
             Competence Level Strands and Mark Grids

14575.01 F   Task 1: Response time: 55 minutes          Mark allocation: 88 marks

             (a) Personal writing: Write an essay for the examiner about your favourite teacher.

             Or

             (b) Creative writing: Write a story for entry in a creative writing competition. The audience is young adults. The picture on page 2 is to be the
                 basis for your writing. You may provide your own title.


                                                              Competence Level Strands Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii)

                                                                  Structuring/Use of Linguistic and
                     Development and Style                                                                   Purpose and Audience
                                                                  Structural Features

               CL0   No creditworthy response.                    No creditworthy response.                  No creditworthy response.                  CL0
                     Simple development; basic style.             Basic structure; there may be              Basic sense of audience with a narrow
10             CL1                                                unsuccessful attempts to use simple        selection of language which may be         CL1
                                                                  structural or linguistic features.         relevant to the purpose.
                     Straightforward development and style.       Mainly logical structure; limited use of   Straightforward sense of purpose; some
               CL2                                                straightforward structural or linguistic   appropriate use of vocabulary to engage    CL2
                                                                  features.                                  the audience in a straightforward way.
                     Competent development; generally             Competent structuring; competent use       Competent sense of purpose;
                     eﬀective style.                              of a range of structural and linguistic    increasingly widening vocabulary some
               CL3                                                devices.                                   of which is selected to engage the         CL3
                                                                                                             audience.
                     Purposeful development; consistent and       Purposeful structuring; purposeful use     Strong sense of purpose; an extended
               CL4   engaging style.                              of a widening range of structural and      vocabulary to enhance and sustain the      CL4
                                                                  linguistic devices to create eﬀect.        audience’s engagement.
                     Assured development and commanding           Confident structuring; assured use of      Assured sense of purpose; judicious
               CL5   style throughout.                            a variety of structural and linguistic     language choices are used to sustain a     CL5
                                                                  devices to create impact.                  positive rapport with the audience.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.
[Turn over
  Marking Grid Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii) (58 marks)

             Strands attained      Marks awarded


                   000                      0


                   100                  1–2


                   110                  3–6


                   111                 7–10


                   112                 11–14


                   221                 15–18


                   222                 19–22


                   223                 23–26


                   332                 27–30


                   333                 31–34


                   334                 35–38


                   443                 39–42


                   444                 43–46


                   445                 47–50


                   554                 51–54


                   555                 55–58




14575.01 F                             11
             Task 1: Response time: 55 minutes      Mark allocation: 30 marks

14575.01 F
                                                               Competence Level Strands Task 1: Writing (iii)

                     Range of Sentence Structures                Use of Punctuation and Grammar              Spelling

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                   No creditworthy response.                   No creditworthy response.                  CL0
                     Some attempt to use basic sentence          Limited use of accurate grammar and/or      Some accurate spelling of basic words.
              CL1    structures/paragraphing.                    basic punctuation.                                                                     CL1

                     Straightforward sentence structure          Some use of both accurate grammar           Generally accurate spelling of
              CL2    and/or paragraphing is generally            and punctuation.                            straightforward words.                     CL2
                     maintained.
                     Competent use of a variety of sentence      Generally secure use of grammar             Increasingly accurate spelling of words
              CL3    structures, with increasingly accurate      and punctuation to support intended         with regular patterns.                     CL3
                     use of paragraphing.                        meaning.
                     Variety in sentence structures,             Increasingly accurate use of grammar        Accurate spelling of most words,
12            CL4    manipulated for eﬀect. Accurate use of      and a range of punctuation to sustain       including those with irregular patterns.   CL4
                     paragraphing.                               clarity and actively engage.
                     Confident use of a wide range of            Accurate use of grammar and confident       Lapses in spelling will be limited to
                     sentence structures, manipulated            use of a variety of punctuation to create   occasional errors.
              CL5    for impact. Accurate and controlled         eﬀect and enhance overall impact.                                                      CL5
                     deployment of paragraphing.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.




[Turn over
        Mark Grid Task 1: Writing (iii) (30 marks)

             Strands attained       Marks awarded


                   000                    0


                   100                   1–2


                   110                   3–4


                   111                   5–6


                   112                   7–8


                   221                  9–10


                   222                  11–12


                   223                  13–14


                   332                  15–16


                   333                  17–18


                   334                  19–20


                   443                  21–22


                   444                  23–24


                   445                  25–26


                   554                  27–28


                   555                  29–30




14575.01 F                               13
Addressing rubric violations with Task 1

If a candidate writes responses to both task 1(a) and 1(b):
Mark both responses and assess them in the normal manner.
Credit the candidate with the response that scores the higher total.
Go back to the dialogue boxes for the task that produced the lower score and type ‘RUBRIC’ under the
CLs that have been already entered.

If a candidate writes his/her response to task 1(a) in the space designated for 1(b) or vice versa:
Mark the response without prejudice and enter the marks in the scoring facility that is available.
You will not have the option of filling in the scores in the correctly numbered box. In this scenario, the
system will offer you the boxes that correspond to where the answer has been written. Use these
boxes.

Responses to T1 (a) or T1 (b) that have no connection to the subject matter of the set tasks:
Assess responses which have not taken appropriate cognisance of the stimulus question using the
criteria set out below (these are based on the descriptors in the Mark Scheme.) ‘Miscues’ such as
these are self-limiting when measured against the Competence Level descriptors for Wi&ii and Wiii.

Wi&ii:
‘Development and Style’ – CL2 is the upper limiting level

‘Structuring/Use of Linguistic and Structural Features’ – CL2 is the upper limiting level

‘Purpose and Audience’ – CL2 is the upper limiting level

Wiii:
‘Range of Sentence Structures’ – CL3 is the upper limiting level

‘Use of Punctuation and Grammar’ – CL2 is the upper limiting level

‘Spelling’ – CL5 is the upper limiting level

Having completed marking the response contact your Supervising Examiner to review your
assessment of the script.




14575.01 F                                          14                                        [Turn over
                             Section B: Reading Literary and Non-fiction Texts

The Assessment Objectives
Reading (AO3)

     (i)     Read and understand texts, selecting material appropriate to purpose, collating from different
             sources and making comparisons and cross-references as appropriate.

     (ii) Develop and sustain interpretations of writers’ ideas and perspectives.

     (iii) Explain and evaluate how writers use linguistic, structural and presentational features to
           achieve effects and engage and influence the reader.

All strands are being assessed in Tasks 2, 3 and 4.

The assessment process

All tasks will be assessed using Competence Level based assessment.

The required style of annotation for all tasks

1    Each response will be assessed on the basis of a single reading using three e-marking tools:

     •       use the underlining tool to highlight appropriate explanation/interpretation;

     •       use the ticking facility to indicate presentation of relevant examples/evidence;

     •       use the C button in the margin to highlight comparing and contrasting; and

     Ignore all errors in punctuation, syntax and spelling as they are not being assessed.

2    The examiner will carefully read and annotate the response.

     The first purpose of the annotation is to clarify, positively, for the examiner, exactly what is
     creditworthy so that the appropriate Competence Level Strands can be selected, leading in turn
     to the award of the correct mark. A secondary function of the annotation is to ensure that, if
     scrutinised, it is clear what elements of a response have been credited.

     All tasks:

     (a) Having annotated the response as required, the examiner will then assess the response in
         relation to each of the three strands of the Competence Levels.

     (b) The three selected Competence Level Strands will be noted in a dialogue box at the end of
         the response.

     (c) Only after selecting and noting the three Competence Level Strands will the examiner turn to
         the mark grid to establish the mark to be awarded.

     The mark grid for Task 2 calls for examiner judgement. The extent to which a candidate has met
     the overall requirements of the achieved Competence Levels Strands will determine the mark to be
     awarded.




14575.01 F                                             15
     Where a range of marks is available, the following procedure should be followed:

     •       where a two mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the response is
             mostly in the 'upper' half or 'lower' half of the achieved Competence Levels and award either
             mark accordingly; and

     •       where a three mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the response is
             mostly at the 'top', 'middle' or 'bottom' of the achieved Competence Levels and award the mark
             accordingly.

     In exceptional circumstances the standard of a candidate's work might range across more than
     two strand levels. Such an eventuality is not covered by the mark grids. Apply the following
     mathematical rule in this case: Task 2 CL422 (totals 8; 4+2+2) equates to CL332 (totals 8) so the
     mark range for this response would be 15–16 marks for Task 2. The support of the Supervising
     Examiner could usefully be sought.




14575.01 F                                            16                                        [Turn over
Here is an example of the required style of annotation in action for a Task 3 response (it should be
read in conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p. 22).

    The response is positively assessed against each of the Competence Level Strands for Task 3.
    Let’s assume that the response can best be summarised by the following descriptors:

        •    "A competent selection of examples from the text to support understanding" (Read and
             understand text/select material CL3)

        •    "Competent explanation of the writer’s intention(s) which may draw upon explicit and implicit
             ideas" (Develop and sustain interpretations CL3)

        •    "Straightforward explanation of some relevant elements of the writer’s craft" (Explain and
             evaluate elements of writer’s craft CL2)

    These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the Task 3 dialogue box:



                     3
                     332



    The next stage in the process is to check these 'strand scores' across the mark grid for Task 3 on
    p. 23. This indicates a score of 8 marks.

    The selected score would then be entered against 3 in the scoring facility on the right side of the
    screen.


3      The examiner will carry out a final check of the examination booklet and any additional objects.

       Remember to:
       •  use the 'E' tool to indicate the end of the candidate's final response.
       •  stamp unused pages/boxed areas with 'SEEN' tool.




14575.01 F                                             17
                          Section B: Reading Literary and Non-fiction Texts

Three tasks: 50 minutes. Mark allocation: 62 marks

Reading Literary Texts

Task 2: Spend 26 minutes reading both texts (see insert) and responding to this task.
                                                                                   Total: 32 marks

Compare and contrast how the writers have created a sense of excitement in both extracts.
Present supporting evidence from both texts.

Below is a range of task-specific material that candidates at all Competence Levels may draw upon for
their responses. Credit any other valid suggestions (check with your Supervising Examiner).

•    in both texts the setting (lake/arena) is established to create an engaging backdrop for the races
     and develops a sense of scale and exhilaration
•    both texts present characters who are bold and daring as they participate in nail-biting competitive
     situations
•    both writers use personification to give the reader a sense of the high velocity of the vehicles
•    both texts present the events in chronological detail to reinforce the competitiveness of the events
•    both writers use metaphors and similes to create a vivid sense of the excitement in both extracts
•    both texts include single-word sentences which help to reflect the tension and drama throughout




Text A
•   appeal to senses (aural and olfactory) in the midst of the action: "electric roar of excited
    spectators, mixed with the sharp smell of fuel"
•   use of triple: "each one a marvel of engineering, speed and technical development" to highlight the
    elite nature of these vessels
•   presentation of character: "Leigh, a talented racer with a passion for pushing the limits", "Skye,
    who was a seasoned racer" to establish an exciting rivalry between two well-matched opponents
•   use of simile: "foamy white crests that looked like galloping horses" to reinforce the speed and
    power of the boats
•   use of single-word sentences: "Faster. Harder. Stronger." to emphasise the characters'
    determination to be victorious
•   use of violent verb: "The wind whipped as the boat surged forward" to amplify the challenging
    encounter as even the elements seemed to be against the racers
•   use of question: "but had it been left too late to secure victory?" to increase the suspense as the
    race reaches its conclusion
•   use of repetition: "the finish line" to reflect the focus of the racers and heighten the tension for the
    reader
•   use of diminutive measurements: "inched ahead...just a split second before The Tempest" to
    reinforce the closeness of the final result




14575.01 F                                          18                                         [Turn over
Text B
•   use of metaphor: "The roar of the engines pierced the night" to forcefully introduce the high octane
    race
•   appeal to senses (aural): "metallic symphony reverberating", "The bikes snarled" to accentuate
    the energy of the motorbikes
•   use of personification: "The bikes snarled beneath their riders. They were hungry for the thrill" to
    emphasise the readiness of the machinery
•   use of similes: "Each [bike was] like a predator stalking its prey", "the bikes weaving like phantoms
    in the night" to convey the power and speed of the machines
•   use of single-word sentences: " Three. Two. One." to build tension at the start of the race
•   use of metaphors: "The track lights melted into streaks of colour", "Each twist of the throttle was a
    thunderclap, each turn a lightning strike" to evoke the speed and movement of the bikes
•   use of sequence of adjectives: "swift, agile and alert" to highlight the expertise of the riders
•   use of extended metaphor: "the roaring Daytona faithful...the two racing gods clashed in the battle
    for supremacy" to elevate the status of the riders and the race




14575.01 F                                         19
             Task 2

14575.01 F
                                                                       Competence Level Strands Task 2

                           Read and understand text/select           Develop and sustain interpretations of       Explain and evaluate elements of writer’s
                                appropriate material                          writer’s intentions                                  craft

              CL0     No creditworthy response.                    No creditworthy response.                      No creditworthy response.                    CL0
                      A basic understanding which may or           A basic sense of the overall intention(s).     Basic remarks on the use of language.
              CL1     may not reference the text(s) directly.                                                                                                  CL1

                      Use of some appropriately selected           Straightforward attempts to explain the        Straightforward explanation of some
                      examples from the text(s) to support         intention(s) of one or both writers.           elements of the writer’s craft, across one
              CL2     understanding and make simple/                                                              or both texts.                               CL2
                      straightforward connections.

                      A competent selection of examples from       Competent explanation of the intentions        Competent explanation of appropriate
              CL3     both texts to support understanding and      of both writers which may draw upon            elements of the writers’ craft, across       CL3
                      make valid comparisons/contrasts.            explicit and some implicit ideas.              both texts.
20
                      A purposeful selection of examples from      Increasingly purposeful interpretation of      Analysis of relevant elements of the
                      both texts to support understanding          both writers’ intentions, including explicit   writers’ craft across both texts.
              CL4     and develop relevant comparisons and         and implicit ideas.                                                                         CL4
                      contrasts.
                      Precise and judicious selection of           Sustained perceptive interpretation of         Evaluation of elements of the writers’
                      examples from both texts to support          both writers’ intentions.                      craft across both texts and how these
              CL5     understanding and explore meaningful                                                        elements impact the reader.                  CL5
                      comparisons and contrasts.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.




[Turn over
                   Mark Grid Task 2 (32 marks)

             Strands attained         Marks awarded


                   000                      0


                   100                     1–2


                   110                     3–4


                   111                     5–6


                   112                     7–8


                   221                    9–10


                   222                    11–12


                   322                    13–14


                   332                    15–16


                   333                    17–18


                   334                    19–20


                   443                    21–22


                   444                    23–24


                   445                    25–26


                   554                    27–29


                   555                    30–32




14575.01 F                                 21
Task 3

Response time: 12 minutes        Total 15 marks

Explain how the writer has gained and held the interest of the reader.

Below is a range of task-specific material that candidates at all Competence Levels may draw from in
their responses.

Credit any other valid suggestions (check with your Supervising Examiner).

•    use of emotive adjectives: "stark warning", "spine-chilling milestone" to create a sinister tone

•    use of assertion: '"Have no doubt about it, alarming chatbots could soon outsmart humans!"'
     to convince the reader because of the confidence of the authority figure

•    use of adverb: "notoriously difficult" to indicate the impressive level of intelligence that AI has now
     demonstrated

•    use of hyperbole: "propels humanity firmly into the realm of Science Fiction" to emphasise the
     inherent danger

•    use of ominous noun: "demise" to reinforce the sombre outcomes associated with AI

•    use of statistics: "over 1,000 industry experts...petitioned" to add credibility and heighten the scale
     of the issue

•    use of parenthesis: "(including SpaceX mogul Elon Musk and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak)"
     to strengthen the argument by referencing high-profile figures

•    use of juxtaposition: "petitioned for a pause on the dangerous race" to suggest a level-headed
     approach, due to the seriousness of this problem, would be beneficial

•    use of question: "How real is the risk from robots?" to manipulate the reader to view AI in a
     negative way




                                                  Source: Adapted from The Great AI debate explodes yet again as
                                                      'godfather' of the technology quits Google | Daily Mail Online




14575.01 F                                           22                                                 [Turn over
                                                                       Competence Level Strands Task 3
14575.01 F
                                                                     Develop and sustain interpretations of      Explain and evaluate elements of writer’s
                     Read and understand text/select material
                                                                              writer’s intentions                                 craft

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                   CL0
                     A basic understanding which may or            A basic sense of the writer’s overall         Basic remarks on the writer’s use of
              CL1    may not make use of textual evidence.         intention(s).                                 language.                                   CL1

                     Use of some appropriately selected            Straightforward attempts to explain/          Straightforward explanation of some
              CL2    examples from the text to support             explanation of the writer’s intention(s).     relevant elements of the writer’s craft.    CL2
                     understanding.
                     A competent selection of examples             Competent explanation of the writer’s         Competent explanation of relevant
              CL3    from the text to support understanding.       intention(s) which may draw upon              elements of the writer’s craft.             CL3
                                                                   explicit and implicit ideas.
                     A purposeful selection of examples            Increasingly purposeful interpretation        Analysis of elements of the writer’s
              CL4    from the text to support understanding.       of the writer’s intention(s), including       craft.                                      CL4
                                                                   explicit and implicit ideas.
23
                     Precise and judicious selection of            Sustained perceptive interpretation of        Evaluation of elements of the writer’s
              CL5    examples from the text to support             the writer’s intention(s).                    craft and how these elements impact         CL5
                     understanding.                                                                              the reader.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.
                   Mark Grid Task 3 (15 marks)

             Strands attained         Marks awarded


                   000                      0


                   100                      1


                   110                      2


                   111                      3


                   112                      4


                   221                      5


                   222                      6


                   322                      7


                   332                      8


                   333                      9


                   334                     10


                   443                     11


                   444                     12


                   445                     13


                   554                     14


                   555                     15




14575.01 F                                 24         [Turn over
Task 4

Response time: 12 minutes       Total: 15 marks

Explain how the writer has presented his views on the positives of Artificial Intelligence for use
in medicine.

•    use of superlative/synecdoche: "The world's greatest minds" to highlight the level and quality of
     thought associated with this important debate

•    use of contrast: "enhance or harm" to convey the polarising nature of the issue

•    use of metaphor: "History is littered…" to indicate to the reader that there are many examples
     where mankind perceived new technology with needless suspicion

•    use of triple/anecdote: "organ transplants, antibiotics and vaccinations" to further the argument
     that other concerning developments in medicine have been amazingly positive innovations

•    use of proclamatory verbs: "heralding" to point to and usher in this new world-changing
     technology and predict its impact

•    use of evidence-based research: "One breakthrough AI model was shown to determine a
     person’s likelihood of developing a range of medical conditions... with staggering accuracy" to
     reinforce the efficacy of this new technology

•    use of short sentence: "And it did so in a heartbeat." to highlight the speed and ease with which
     the AI programme is able to carry out complex processes

•    use of pun: "in a heartbeat" to allude to the medical advantages of AI with levity

•    use of alliteration: "make that verruca vanish" to humorously reinforce the idea that AI will have a
     positive impact on medical treatment




                                                    Source: Adapted from The Great AI debate explodes yet again
                                                   as 'godfather' of the technology quits Google | Daily Mail Online




14575.01 F                                          25
                                                                       Competence Level Strands Task 4
14575.01 F
                     Read and understand text/select                  Develop and sustain interpretations              Explain and evaluate elements of
                     appropriate material                                  of the writer’s intentions                          the writer’s craft

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                       No creditworthy response.                     CL0
                     A basic understanding which may or            A basic sense of the writer’s overall           Basic remarks on the writer’s use of
              CL1    may not make use of textual evidence.         intention(s).                                   language.                                     CL1

                     Use of some appropriately selected            Straightforward attempts to explain/            Straightforward explanation of some
              CL2    examples from the text to support             explanation of the writer’s intention(s).       relevant elements of the writer’s craft.      CL2
                     understanding.
                     A competent selection of examples from        Competent explanation of the writer’s           Competent explanation of relevant
              CL3    the text to support understanding.            intention(s) which may draw upon                elements of the writer’s craft.               CL3
                                                                   explicit and implicit ideas.
                     A purposeful selection of examples from       Increasingly purposeful interpretation of       Analysis of elements of the writer’s craft.
              CL4    the text to support understanding.            the writer’s intention(s), including explicit                                                 CL4
                                                                   and implicit ideas.
26
                     Precise and judicious selection of            Sustained perceptive interpretation of          Evaluation of elements of the writer’s
              CL5    examples from the text to support             the writer’s intention(s).                      craft and how these elements impact the       CL5
                     understanding.                                                                                reader.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.




[Turn over
                   Mark Grid Task 4 (15 marks)

             Strands attained         Marks awarded


                   000                      0


                   100                      1


                   110                      2


                   111                      3


                   112                      4


                   221                      5


                   222                      6


                   322                      7


                   332                      8


                   333                      9


                   334                     10


                   443                     11


                   444                     12


                   445                     13


                   554                     14


                   555                     15




14575.01 F                                 27
