                     General Certificate of Secondary Education
                                    Summer 2025


                           English Language
                                     Unit 1
                Writing for Purpose and Audience and
             Reading to Access Non-fiction and Media Texts
                                    [GEN11]

                        WEDNESDAY 7 MAY, MORNING




                                 MARK
                                SCHEME




14574.01 F
General Marking Instructions

A General Introduction to the Assessment of CCEA’s GCSE English Language

Introduction

Mark schemes are intended to ensure that the GCSE examinations are marked consistently and fairly.
The mark schemes provide markers with an indication of the nature and range of candidates’ responses
likely to be worthy of credit. They also set out the criteria against which marks are allocated to
candidates’ responses. The task-specific instructions should be read in conjunction with these general
marking instructions.

Assessment objectives

Below are the relevant assessment objectives for English Language Unit 1.
Reading AO3 Candidates must:
    (i) read and understand texts, selecting material appropriate to purpose;
    (ii) develop and sustain interpretations of writers’ ideas and perspectives; and
    (iii) explain and evaluate how writers use linguistic, structural and presentational features to
          achieve effects and engage and influence the reader.

Writing AO4 Candidates must:
    (i) write to communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, using and adapting forms and
          selecting vocabulary appropriate to task and purpose in ways that engage the reader;
    (ii) organise information and ideas into structured and sequenced sentences, paragraphs and
          whole texts, using a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and overall
          coherence; and
    (iii) use a range of sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling,
          punctuation and grammar.

Quality of candidates’ responses

In assessing candidates’ work, examiners should be looking for a quality of response reflecting the level
of maturity which may reasonably be expected of a 16-year-old.

Flexibility in marking

Mark schemes are not intended to be totally prescriptive. No mark scheme can cover all the responses
which candidates may produce. In the event of unanticipated responses, examiners are expected to
use their professional judgement to assess their validity. If a response is particularly problematic, then
examiners should seek the guidance of their Supervising Examiner.

Positive marking

Examiners will be positive in their marking, giving appropriate credit for what candidates know,
understand and can do. Examiners should make use of the whole of the available mark range for any
particular task and be prepared to award full marks taking into consideration the time available and the
maturity of the candidature. Task-specific materials are indicative guides and are neither prescriptive nor
exhaustive.

A mark of zero

This score should only be used where there is no creditworthy response.




14574.01 F                                           2                                          [Turn over
The marking process
The required process, standard and style of marking will be the business of the standardising meeting.

The responses will be marked using positive assessment, crediting what has been achieved. The mark
schemes are designed to support this positive approach.

Pre-marked exemplar scripts will be made available to all examiners at the Standardising Meeting.
These ‘benchmark scripts’ will have been marked and annotated by the senior examining team prior
to each standardising meeting and should be used for reference by examiners throughout the marking
period.

The relationship between tasks, mark schemes and Competence Level Strands

Every task has either:

     (a) a mark scheme that is built around a task-specific checklist, Competence Level (CL) Strands
         and a mark grid

The Competence Levels, which detail increasing levels of proficiency, are made up of three strands.
These are derived from the Assessment Objectives and each of the strands focuses on important
characteristics within the response. The role of each examiner is to identify positively what has been
achieved and then match each candidate’s level of proficiency to the appropriate descriptors.

Or

     (b) an individual task checklist tied to specific mark allocations




14574.01 F                                           3
                                Section A: Writing for Purpose and Audience

Task 1

The Assessment Objectives

Writing (AO4)

     (i)     Write to communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, using and adapting forms and
             selecting vocabulary appropriate to task and purpose in ways that engage the reader.

     (ii) Organise information and ideas into structured and sequenced sentences, paragraphs and
          whole texts, using a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and
          coherence.

     (iii) Use a range of sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling,
           punctuation and grammar.

All are being assessed.

The examiner will be required to make two distinct assessments: one for Task 1(i): Writing (i) and (ii)
and a second assessment for Task 1(ii): Writing (iii).

The two required assessments

1    Each response will be assessed on the basis of a single reading and annotated using three
     e-marking tools: underlining, circling and wavy lining. At the end of the response insert a text
     box and the appropriate W stamp.

     The method and style of annotation:

     •       the underlining tool is used to indicate creditworthy material.

     •       the circling tool serves two purposes:

             (a) to highlight spelling mistakes with each error being circled only once - alot ...
                 happend

             (b) for indicating minor and/or occasional lapses in punctuation such as missing
                 apostrophes, commas and full stops – run’s/...two three or four/ ...to me it was not long
                 after....

     •       the wavy lining tool will denote lapses in expression – for example – he seen yous threw the
             open door. Use the vertical option in the margin to indicate ongoing issues.




14574.01 F                                              4                                            [Turn over
2    The method and style of marking outlined on p. 4 is used in conjunction with the Competence
     Level (CL) Strands for Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii), the examiner will positively assess the features
     of that response.

     The process will be carried out in this order:

     (a) The examiner will carefully read and annotate the response.

     (b) The three Competence Level Strands that best match the candidate’s achievement will be
         selected and noted in the relevant dialogue box.

     (c) Only after selecting and noting the three Competence Level Strands will the examiner turn to
         the mark grid to establish the mark to be awarded. Where the mark grid calls for an examiner
         judgement, the extent to which a candidate has met the overall requirements of the particular
         Competence Level Strands will determine the mark to be awarded.

             Where a range of marks is available, the following procedure should be followed:
             •  where a two mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the response
                is mostly in the ‘upper’ half or ‘lower’ half of the achieved Competence Levels and award
                either mark accordingly; and

             •   where a three or four mark range is available, the examiner will consider whether the
                 response is mostly at the ‘top’, ‘middle’ or ‘bottom’ of the achieved Competence Levels
                 and award the mark accordingly.

             In exceptional circumstances the standard of a candidate’s work might range across more than
             two strand levels. Such an eventuality is not covered by the mark grids. Apply the following
             mathematical rule in this case: Task 1(i) CL422 (totals 8; 4+2+2). This equates to CL332
             (totals 8) so the mark range for this response would be 26–29 marks for Task 1(i). The support
             of the Supervising Examiner could usefully be sought.




14574.01 F                                            5
Here is an example of this style of annotation in action for Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii) (this should be
read in conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p.10):

 The response is positively assessed against each of the three strands that make up the
 Competence Levels for Task 1(i). Let’s assume it can best be summarised by the following
 descriptors:

       •     “Competent development; generally effective style” (Development and Style CL3)

       •     “Competent structuring; competent use of a range of structural and linguistic devices”
             (Structuring/Linguistic and Structural Features CL3)

       •     “Straightforward sense of purpose; some appropriate use of vocabulary to engage the
             audience in a straightforward way” (Purpose and Audience CL2)

 These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the dialogue box for 1(i):



                   Wi + ii                332


 The next stage in the process is to check these ‘strand scores’ on the mark grid for Task 1: Writing
 (i) and (ii) on p.11. This indicates a mark range of 26–29 marks. The examiner will consider whether
 the response is mostly at the ‘top’, ‘middle’ or ‘bottom’ of the achieved Competence Level Strands
 and award the appropriate mark accordingly.

 This score would then be entered against 1(i) in the scoring facility on the right side of the screen.




14574.01 F                                            6                                        [Turn over
Here is an example of this style of annotation in action for Task 1: Writing (iii) (this should be read in
conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p.12).


 The response is positively assessed against each of the three strands that make up the Competence
 Level Strands for Task 1(ii). Let’s assume it can best be summarised by the following descriptors:

       •     “Competent use of a variety of sentence structures, with increasingly accurate use of
             paragraphing”
             (Range of Sentence Structures CL3)

       •     “Generally secure use of grammar and punctuation to support intended meaning” (Use of
             Punctuation and Grammar CL3)

       •     “Increasingly accurate spelling of words with regular patterns” (Spelling CL3)

 These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the dialogue box for 1(ii):



                   Wiii                  333


 The next stage in the process is to check these ‘strand scores’ against the mark grid for Task 1:
 Writing (iii) on p.13. This indicates a score of 17/18 marks. The examiner will consider whether the
 response is mostly in the ‘upper’ half or ‘lower’ half of the achieved Competence Level and award
 either mark accordingly.

 The selected score would then be entered against 1(ii) in the scoring facility on the right side of the
 screen.




14574.01 F                                            7
General Guidance on the Application of the Competence Level Strands

The first assessment: Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii)

The following guidance will help to highlight the extent to which a candidate has shaped the response
appropriately.

Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively.

     •       a handling of the topic in such a way as to positively develop the audience’s interest;
     •       use of a style that builds a positive relationship with the prescribed audience; and
     •       possible use of techniques to engage the prescribed audience.

Adapting form and vocabulary to task and purpose in ways that engage the audience.

     •       to tailor the piece specifically for the prescribed audience;
     •       to use an appropriate tone that is designed to engage and sustain the audience’s attention;
             and
     •       to use vocabulary that is in keeping with the purpose of the task.

Organise information and ideas into structured, sequenced sentences, paragraphs and whole
texts.

     •       to create a logical progression with organisation of ideas to sustain the audience’s interest;
     •       to use engaging/challenging introductory and concluding paragraphs; and
     •       to use topic/link sentences for different paragraphs.

Use a variety of linguistic and structural features to support cohesion and overall coherence.

     •       to vary sentence length for effect;
     •       to use appropriate connectives; and
     •       to use rhetorical devices (such as the rule of three, questions, hyperbole) to develop interest/
             develop a rapport with the specified audience.

Credit any other valid strategies.




14574.01 F                                              8                                         [Turn over
The second assessment: Task 1: Writing (iii)

The following guidance will help to highlight the extent to which a candidate has shaped the response
appropriately.

The range and effectiveness of sentence structures.

     •       the wider the range and the greater the degree of originality and control in structuring
             sentences, the more opportunity the candidate has to establish a positive rapport with the
             prescribed audience; and
     •       the more assured and varied the sentence structuring/paragraphing is, the more engaging the
             response is likely to be.

The use made of accurate punctuation and grammar.

     •       control of a variety of appropriate punctuation and grammar to help to maintain interest. The
             greater the control and variation in the use of punctuation, the more engaging the response is
             likely to be.

The use made of accurate spelling.

     •       accuracy in spelling of words with both regular and irregular patterns.

Credit any other valid strategies.




14574.01 F                                              9
             Competence Level Strands and Mark Grids

14574.01 F   Task 1    Response time: 55 minutes     Mark allocation: 57 marks
             Write a speech for your classmates persuading them to agree with your views on this question:
             “Is homework still necessary for students today?”


                                                              Competence Level Strands Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii)

                                                                  Structuring/Use of Linguistic and
                     Development and Style                                                                       Purpose and Audience
                                                                  Structural Features

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                    No creditworthy response.                      No creditworthy response.                 CL0
                     Simple development, basic style.             Basic structure; there may be                  Basic sense of audience with a narrow
                                                                  unsuccessful attempts to use simple            selection of language which may be
              CL1                                                 structural or linguistic features.             relevant to the purpose.                  CL1


                     Straightforward development and style.       Mainly logical structure; limited use of       Straightforward sense of purpose; some
                                                                  straightforward structural or linguistic       appropriate use of vocabulary to engage
10                                                                features.                                      the audience in a straightforward way.
              CL2                                                                                                                                          CL2



                     Competent development; generally             Competent structuring; competent use           Competent sense of purpose;
                     eﬀective style.                              of a range of structural and linguistic        increasingly widening vocabulary some
              CL3                                                 devices.                                       of which is selected to engage the        CL3
                                                                                                                 audience.

                     Purposeful development; consistent and       Purposeful structuring; purposeful use         Strong sense of purpose; an extended
                     engaging style.                              of a widening range of structural and          vocabulary to enhance and sustain the
              CL4                                                 linguistic devices to create eﬀect.            audience’s engagement.                    CL4


                     Assured development and commanding           Confident structuring; assured use of a        Assured sense of purpose; judicious
                     style throughout.                            variety of structural and linguistic devices   language choices are used to sustain a
              CL5                                                                                                                                          CL5
                                                                  to create impact.                              positive rapport with the audience.

[Turn over   Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.
    Mark Grid Task 1: Writing (i) and (ii)

             Strands attained   Marks awarded


                   000                0


                   100               1–2


                   110               3–5


                   111               6–9


                   112              10–13


                   221              14–17


                   222              18–21


                   223              22–25


                   332              26–29


                   333              30–33


                   334              34–37


                   443              38–41


                   444              42–45


                   445              46–49


                   554              50–53


                   555              54–57


14574.01 F                           11
             Task 1   Response time: 55 minutes        Mark allocation: 30 marks

14574.01 F                                                         Competence Level Strands Task 1: Writing (iii)

                      Range of Sentence Structures                  Use of Punctuation and Grammar              Spelling

              CL0     No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                   No creditworthy response.                  CL0
                      Some attempt to use basic sentence            Limited use of accurate grammar and/or      Some accurate spelling of basic words.
              CL1     structures/paragraphing.                      basic punctuation.                                                                     CL1

                      Straightforward sentence structure and/       Some use of both accurate grammar and       Generally accurate spelling of
              CL2     or paragraphing is generally maintained.      punctuation.                                straightforward words.                     CL2

                      Competent use of a variety of sentence        Generally secure use of grammar             Increasingly accurate spelling of words
                      structures, with increasingly accurate use    and punctuation to support intended         with regular patterns.
              CL3                                                                                                                                          CL3
                      of paragraphing.                              meaning.

12                    Variety in sentence structures,               Increasingly accurate use of grammar        Accurate spelling of most words,
                      manipulated for eﬀect. Accurate use of        and a range of punctuation to sustain       including those with irregular patterns.
              CL4     paragraphing.                                 clarity and actively engage.                                                           CL4


                      Confident use of a wide range of              Accurate use of grammar and confident       Lapses in spelling will be limited to
                      sentence structures, manipulated              use of a variety of punctuation to create   occasional errors.
              CL5     for impact. Eﬀective and controlled           eﬀect and enhance overall impact.                                                      CL5
                      deployment of paragraphing.

             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.




[Turn over
              Mark Grid Task 1: Writing (iii)
             Strands attained      Marks awarded


                   000                     0


                   100                  1–2


                   110                  3–4


                   111                  5–6


                   112                  7–8


                   221                 9–10


                   222                 11–12


                   223                 13–14


                   332                 15–16


                   333                 17–18


                   334                 19–20


                   443                 21–22


                   444                 23–24


                   445                 25–26


                   554                 27–28


                   555                 29–30



14574.01 F                            13
Addressing rubric violations with Task 1

Responses to Task 1 that have no connection to the subject matter of the set task:

Assess the response which has not taken appropriate cognisance of the stimulus question using
the criteria set out below. ‘Miscues’ are self-limiting when measured against the Competence Level
descriptors for Wi+ii and Wiii.

Wi+ii:
Development and Style – CL2 is the upper limiting level
Structuring/Use of Linguistic and Structural Features – CL2 is the upper limiting level
Purpose and Audience – CL2 is the upper limiting level

Wiii:
Range of Sentence Structures – CL3 is the upper limiting level
Use of Punctuation and Grammar – CL2 is the upper limiting level
Spelling – CL5 is the upper limiting level

Having completed marking the response contact your Supervising Examiner to review your
assessment of the script.




14574.01 F                                          14                                      [Turn over
                        Section B: Reading to Access Non-fiction and Media Texts

The Assessment Objectives
Reading (AO3)

     (i)     Read and understand texts, selecting material appropriate to purpose.

     (ii) Develop and sustain interpretations of writers’ ideas and perspectives.

     (iii) Explain and evaluate how writers use linguistic, structural and presentational features
           to achieve effects and engage and influence the reader.

All strands of Reading (AO3) are being assessed in Tasks 2, 3, 4 and 5.

The assessment process

Tasks 2 and 4 will be assessed using Competence Level based assessment.

Tasks 3 and 5 will be assessed using task-specific checklists.

The required style of annotation for all tasks

1    Each response will be assessed on the basis of a single reading using the two e-marking tools:
     underlining and ticking

     •       use underlining to highlight appropriate explanation/interpretation;

     •       use ticking to indicate presentation of relevant examples/evidence; and

     •       ignore all errors in punctuation, syntax and spelling as they are not being assessed.

2    The examiner will carefully read and annotate the response.

     The purpose of the annotation is to clarify, positively, for the examiner, exactly what is
     creditworthy so that the appropriate Competence Level Strands can be selected, leading in turn
     to the award of the correct mark. A secondary function of the annotation is to ensure that, if
     scrutinised, it is clear what elements of a response have been credited.

3    Tasks 2 and 4

     (a) Having annotated the response as required, the examiner will then assess the
         response in relation to each of the three strands of the relevant Competence Levels.

     (b) The three selected Competence Level Strands will be noted in the appropriately numbered
         dialogue box at the end of the response.

     (c) Only after selecting and noting the three Competence Level Strands will the examiner
         turn to the mark grid to establish the mark to be awarded.

             Where the mark grid calls for an examiner judgement, the extent to which a candidate
             has met the overall requirements of the selected Competence Level Strands will determine
             the mark to be awarded. Where a two mark range is available, the examiner will consider
             whether the response is mostly in the ‘upper’ half or ‘lower’ half of the achieved Competence
             Levels and award either mark accordingly.

             In exceptional circumstances the standard of a candidate’s work might range across
             more than two strand levels. Such an eventuality is not covered by the mark grids.
             Apply the following mathematical rule in this case: Task 2 CL422 (totals 8; 4+2+2) equates to
             CL332 (totals 8) so the mark range for this response would be 11-12 marks for Task 2. The
             support of the Supervising Examiner could usefully be sought.

14574.01 F                                             15
Here is an example of the style of annotation required for a Task 2 response (it should be read in
conjunction with the relevant Competence Level Strands on p.18).

    The response is positively assessed against each of the Competence Level Strands for
    Task 2. Let’s assume that the response can best be summarised by the following descriptors:

        •    “Use of some appropriately selected examples from the text to support understanding”
             (Read and understand text/select appropriate material CL2)

        •    “Straightforward attempts to offer explanations of the writer’s intention(s)”
             (Develop and sustain interpretations of the writer’s intentions CL2)

        •    “Competent explanation of relevant elements of the writer’s craft” (Explain and evaluate
             elements of the writer’s craft CL3)

    These individual strand levels are noted at the end of the response in the Task 2 dialogue box:



                     2
                     223


    The next stage in the process is to check these ‘strand scores’ across the mark grid for
    Task 2 on p.18. This indicates a score of 9/10 marks. The examiner will consider whether the
    response is mostly in the ‘upper’ half and ‘lower’ half of the achieved Competence Level and award
    either mark accordingly.

    The selected score would then be entered against 2 in the scoring facility on the right side of the
    screen.

4      Tasks 3 and 5

       (a) The assessment of each of these tasks is measured against task-specific criteria laid out in
           detail later.

       (b) The score for each will then be entered in the scoring facility on the right side of the screen.


5      The examiner will carry out a final check of the examination booklet and any additional objects.

Remember to:

•      use the ‘E’ tool to indicate the end of the candidate’s final response.
•      stamp unused pages/boxed areas with the ‘SEEN’ tool.




14574.01 F                                             16                                         [Turn over
Task 2:

Response time: 15 minutes.             Total 21 marks

Read the text below where the writer expresses his enthusiasm for the cheese toastie.
Explain how the writer has presented this in a way that engages his readers’ interest. Support
your comments with evidence.

Below is a range of task-specific material that candidates at all Competence Levels may draw upon for
their responses. (Credit any other valid suggestions) (check with your Supervising Examiner).

•    use of simile: “Toast, like the colour of a Strictly Come Dancing contestant’s tan” to create a
     humorous and relatable opening
•    use of personification: “Toast...warmly embraces” to suggest toast offers physical comfort
•    use of sensory adjectives: “soft, oozy” to elevate the appeal for the reader
•    use of litotes: “I don’t deny” to convey to the reader the writer has considered the health risks
•    use of hyperbole: “no finer food in the universe” to present a light-hearted and enthusiastic opinion
     about toasties
•    use of question: “Where did the toastie originate?” to demonstrate the writer’s keen interest in the
     subject, which he hopes the reader will share
•    use of anecdote to portray the writer’s detailed knowledge of, and enthusiasm for, the history of
     the toastie
•    use of idiom: “weighing a ton” to develop the humour and exaggerate the weight of the toastie
     maker
•    use of nomenclature: “Mr Toastie” to reflect the writer’s childish naming of the toastie maker and
     his affection for this treasured object, consequently persuading the reader to share his enthusiasm
•    use of alliteration: “through thick and thin, brioche and bagels” to draw attention to the versatility of
     the appliance
•    use of puns: “through thick and thin...long may he continue to ‘dough’ just that!” to convey his
     gratitude for the toastie maker




                                          Source: Adapted from When earning a crust gets harder, we need the comfort
                                                    and strength of the very British toastie | Max Wallis | The Guardian




14574.01 F                                            17
                                                                       Competence Level Strands Task 2
14574.01 F
                                                                   Develop and sustain interpretations of          Explain and evaluate elements of writer’s
                     Read and understand text/select material
                                                                   writer’s intentions                             craft

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                       No creditworthy response.                     CL0
                     A basic understanding which may or may        A basic sense of the writer’s overall           Basic remarks on the writer’s use of
              CL1    not make use of textual evidence.             intention(s).                                   language.                                     CL1

                     Use of some appropriately selected            Straightforward attempts to oﬀer                Straightforward explanation of some
              CL2    examples from the text to support             explanations of the writer’s intention(s).      relevant elements of the writer’s craft.      CL2
                     understanding.

                     A competent selection of examples from        Competent explanation of the writer’s           Competent explanation of relevant
                     the text to support understanding.            intention(s) which may draw upon explicit       elements of the writer’s craft.
              CL3                                                  and implicit ideas.                                                                           CL3


18                   A purposeful selection of examples from       Increasingly purposeful interpretation of       Analysis of elements of the writer’s craft.
                     the text to support understanding.            the writer’s intention(s), including explicit
              CL4                                                  and implicit ideas.                                                                           CL4


                     Precise and judicious selection of            Sustained perceptive interpretation of the      Evaluation of elements of the writer’s
                     examples from the text to support             writer’s intention(s).                          craft and how these elements impact the
              CL5    understanding.                                                                                reader.                                       CL5


             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.




[Turn over
                         Mark Grid Task 2
             Strands attained        Marks awarded


                   000                       0


                   100                       1


                   110                       2


                   111                       3


                   112                       4


                   221                      5–6


                   222                      7–8


                   322                      9–10


                   332                   11–12


                   333                   13–14


                   334                   15–16


                   443                      17


                   444                      18


                   445                      19


                   554                      20


                   555                      21




14574.01 F                                  19
Task 3

Response time: 10 minutes.      Total 12 marks.

In your own words, write down two reasons why the writer thinks toasties are appealing: one
reason from each paragraph. For each reason present two pieces of supporting evidence.

Style of Assessment

Crediting each reason [up to a max. of 4 marks]
•   These are initially assessed on the basis of a single reading
•   Use underlining to highlight the creditworthy elements of the response. If none is present, use the
    ‘SEEN’ stamp to indicate that the response has been read
•   This underlined creditworthy material will then be assessed against the following descriptors before
    the mark is selected on the basis of best fit
•   Enter this mark in the scoring facility for 3(a) or 3(c) on the right-hand side of the screen.

 Demonstrates a clear and precise understanding of the above
                                                                             4
 point using his/her own words
 Demonstrates an accurate understanding of the above point
                                                                             3
 mainly using his/her own words
 Demonstrates a mostly accurate understanding of the above
 point using his/her own words but with reliance on the language             2
 of the text
 Demonstrates a general sense of the above point relying
                                                                             1
 heavily on the language of the text
 No creditworthy response                                                    0


Crediting the supporting evidence [up to a max. of 2 marks – 1 mark for each piece of
supporting evidence]
•   Evidence may be reported or quoted
•   Use the ticking tool to indicate each piece of valid supporting evidence. If none is present, use the
    ‘SEEN’ stamp to indicate that the response has been read
•   The score awarded is the total number of ticks (none, one or two) and this is entered in the scoring
    facility for 3(b) or 3(d) on the right-hand side of the screen.




14574.01 F                                         20                                        [Turn over
(a) Reason from paragraph one:

     The toastie is cheap, convenient and does not require specialist equipment.

(b) Two pieces of supporting evidence from paragraph one:

     “costs little”
     “No toastie maker? No problem.”
     “handy toaster bag”
     “can be inexpensive”
     “no need to break the bank”
     “make it at home”
     “for about 50p.”

(c) Reason from paragraph two:

     The toastie is versatile and can be transformed/improved by including different fillings.

(d) Two pieces of supporting evidence from paragraph two:

     “flexible”
     “can be enhanced”
     “jazzed-up”
     “doused in ketchup”
     “become a scrumptious treat”
     “elevated”
     “adaptability”
     “never-ending list of possibilities”

     Unacceptable evidence for (d):
     “processed cheese”
     “pickles”
     “doused”
     “ketchup”
     “Brie and cranberry”
     “saviour”
     “ultimate snack”




                                                Source: Adapted from When earning a crust gets harder, we need the
                                            comfort and strength of the very British toastie | Max Wallis | The Guardian




14574.01 F                                                21
Reading Media Texts

Tasks 4 and 5 are based on the DVD cover for “Hugo”.

Task 4: Spend 17 minutes on this task.     Total 20 marks

Explain how language has been used to develop a sense that this DVD would be exciting to
watch. Present evidence to support your comments.

Below is a range of task-specific material that candidates at all Competence Levels may draw on in
their responses. Credit any other valid suggestions (check with your Supervising Examiner).

•    use of triple: “Orphaned, alone and scared” to evoke sympathy from the reader for the main
     protagonist
•    use of emotive language: “evading capture by the intimidating station inspector” to create a sense
     of threat faced by Hugo
•    use of metaphor: “fix the broken pieces of his past” to convey Hugo’s background and the
     challenges he has already encountered
•    use of personification: “Racing against time” to suggest a sense of urgency and excitement
•    use of idiom: “one step ahead”, to indicate the impending peril faced by Hugo and Isabelle
•    use of juxtaposition: “imagination and intrigue” to suggest the conflict and unpredictability the
     characters will experience
•    use of rhetorical question: “Will Hugo ever find the answers he seeks?” to highlight the
     uncertainty of Hugo’s future
•    use of imperative: “Be captivated, be inspired”, “don’t miss your chance” to reflect the exciting
     narrative
•    use of further metaphor: “let your heart take flight” to suggest the film will provide a range of
     exciting and emotional reactions
•    use of hyperbole: “cinematic adventure of a lifetime” to highlight the enthralling nature of the film
•    use of short sentence: “Hugo’s spellbinding story awaits” to heighten the anticipation
•    use of pun: “Time is ticking” to emphasise a core theme of the film and reinforce the sense of
     urgency




14574.01 F                                          22                                        [Turn over
                                                                       Competence Level Strands Task 4
14574.01 F
                                                                   Develop and sustain interpretations of          Explain and evaluate elements of writer’s
                     Read and understand text/select material
                                                                   writer’s intentions                             craft

              CL0    No creditworthy response.                     No creditworthy response.                       No creditworthy response.                     CL0
                     A basic understanding which may or may        A basic sense of the writer’s overall           Basic remarks on the writer’s use of
              CL1    not make use of textual evidence.             intention(s).                                   language.                                     CL1

                     Use of some appropriately selected            Straightforward attempts to explain/            Straightforward explanation of some
              CL2    examples from the text to support             explanation of the writer’s intention(s).       relevant elements of the writer’s craft.      CL2
                     understanding.
                     A competent selection of examples from        Competent explanation of the writer’s           Competent explanation of relevant
                     the text to support understanding.            intention(s) which may draw upon explicit       elements of the writer’s craft.
              CL3                                                  and implicit ideas.                                                                           CL3


23                   A purposeful selection of examples from       Increasingly purposeful interpretation of       Analysis of elements of the writer’s craft.
                     the text to support understanding.            the writer’s intention(s), including explicit
              CL4                                                  and implicit ideas.                                                                           CL4


                     Precise and judicious selection of            Sustained perceptive interpretation of the      Evaluation of elements of the writer’s
                     examples from the text to support             writer’s intention(s).                          craft and how these elements impact the
              CL5    understanding.                                                                                reader.                                       CL5


             Each successive level description assumes the continued demonstration of the qualities described in the lower levels.
              Mark Grid Task 4 (20 marks)
             Strands attained   Marks awarded


                   000                0


                   100                1


                   110                2


                   111                3


                   112                4


                   221                5


                   222               6–7


                   322               8–9


                   332              10–11


                   333              12–13


                   334              14–15


                   443               16


                   444               17


                   445               18


                   554               19


                   555               20




14574.01 F                           24         [Turn over
Task 5

Response time: 8 minutes                 Total 10 marks.

Select two examples of presentational features used in this DVD cover to make it appealing to
the audience. Explain the intended effect of these two presentational features.


Style of Assessment

Crediting the selection of valid presentational features [1 mark for each]

•    Use the ticking tool to indicate the presence of a valid presentational feature from the list provided.
•    Use underlining to highlight the creditworthy elements of the response. If none is present, use the
     ‘SEEN’ stamp to indicate that the response has been read.
•    In each case the score awarded is zero or one mark and this is entered in the appropriate scoring
     facility 5(a) or 5(c) on the right-hand side of the screen.

Crediting each ‘Explanation’ [up to a max. of 4 marks]

•    These are initially assessed on the basis of a single reading.
•    Use underlining to highlight the creditworthy elements of the response. If none is present, use the
     ‘SEEN’ stamp to indicate that the response has been read.
•    This underlined creditworthy material will then be assessed against the following descriptors before
     the mark is selected on the basis of best fit.
•    Enter this mark in the scoring facility 5(b) or 5(d) on the right-hand side of the screen.

      Demonstrates a clear and precise understanding of the
                                                                                  4
      presentational feature identified
      Demonstrates an accurate understanding of the
                                                                                  3
      presentational feature identified
      Demonstrates a mostly accurate understanding of the
                                                                                  2
      presentational feature identified
      Demonstrates a general sense of the presentational
                                                                                  1
      feature identified
      No creditworthy response                                                    0



List of possible presentational features for 5(a) and 5(c):
•    a specific aspect of colour, including contrasting colours
•    a specific aspect of the layout
•    a specific aspect of the background
•    the presentation of font referring specifically to the title or review
•    the image of the characters
•    the image of the clock

Credit any other valid suggestions (check with your Supervising Examiner).
List of possible explanations for 5(b) and 5(d) which should demonstrate the intended eﬀect:
•    the larger image of the boy compared to the smaller image of the man in uniform may suggest that
     good will overcome adversity
•    the different sizes of the images of the characters indicate their respective significance in the story
     which will appeal to younger audiences
•    the gold font and hues of the clock-face suggest that time is precious in this story

14574.01 F                                             25
•    the dominant image of the clock indicates its centrality to the narrative
•    the image of the boy hanging from the clock suggests elements of danger and a dramatic,
     action-packed film
•    the motif/image of the stars adds a sense of awe and wonder

Credit any other valid suggestions (check with your Supervising Examiner).




14574.01 F                                       26                                      [Turn over
