     Syllabus
     Cambridge IGCSE™
     First Language English 0500
     Use this syllabus for exams in 2024, 2025 and 2026.
     Exams are available in the June and November series.
     Exams are also available in the March series in India only.




Version 1
For the purposes of screen readers, any mention in this document of Cambridge IGCSE
refers to Cambridge International General Certification of Secondary Education.
Why choose Cambridge International?

Cambridge International prepares school students for life, helping them develop an informed curiosity and a
lasting passion for learning. We are part of the University of Cambridge.

Our Cambridge Pathway gives students a clear path for educational success from age 5 to 19. Schools can
shape the curriculum around how they want students to learn – with a wide range of subjects and flexible ways
to offer them. It helps students discover new abilities and a wider world, and gives them the skills they need for
life, so they can achieve at school, university and work.

Our programmes and qualifications set the global standard for international education. They are created by
subject experts, rooted in academic rigour and reflect the latest educational research. They provide a strong
platform for learners to progress from one stage to the next, and are well supported by teaching and learning
resources.

Our mission is to provide educational benefit through provision of international programmes and qualifications
for school education and to be the world leader in this field. Together with schools, we develop Cambridge
learners who are confident, responsible, reflective, innovative and engaged – equipped for success in the
modern world.

Every year, nearly a million Cambridge students from 10 000 schools in 160 countries prepare for their future
with the Cambridge Pathway.



School feedback: ‘We think the Cambridge curriculum is superb preparation for university.’
Feedback from: Christoph Guttentag, Dean of Undergraduate Admissions, Duke University, USA




  Quality management
  Cambridge International is committed to providing exceptional quality. In line with this commitment, our
  quality management system for the provision of international qualifications and education programmes
  for students aged 5 to 19 is independently certified as meeting the internationally recognised standard,
  ISO 9001:2015. Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/ISO9001




© Cambridge University Press & Assessment September 2021
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment. Cambridge University Press &
Assessment is a department of the University of Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press & Assessment retains the copyright on all its publications. Registered centres are permitted to copy
material from this booklet for their own internal use. However, we cannot give permission to centres to photocopy any material that is
acknowledged to a third party even for internal use within a centre.
Contents

Why choose Cambridge International?......................................................................... 2

1 Why choose this syllabus? ......................................................................................... 4

2 Syllabus overview . ...................................................................................................... 7
   Aims                                                                                                                     7
   Content overview                                                                                                         7
   Assessment overview                                                                                                      8
   Assessment objectives                                                                                                    9

3 Subject content ..........................................................................................................11

4 Details of the assessment . .......................................................................................13
   Paper 1 Reading                                                                                                         13
   Paper 2 Directed Writing and Composition                                                                                15
   Component 3 Coursework Portfolio                                                                                        16
   Additional information for Component 3 Coursework Portfolio                                                             18
   Component 4 Speaking and Listening Test                                                                                25
   Command words                                                                                                          30

5 What else you need to know .................................................................................... 31
   Before you start                                                                                                        31
   Making entries                                                                                                         32
   Accessibility and equality                                                                                             33
   After the exam                                                                                                         34
   How students and teachers can use the grades                                                                           34
   Grade descriptions                                                                                                     34
   Changes to this syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026                                                                       35




  Important: Changes to this syllabus
  For information about changes to this syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026, go to page 35.
  The latest syllabus is version 1, published September 2021.
  Any textbooks endorsed to support the syllabus for examination from 2020 are still suitable for use with this
  syllabus.
                                                       Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026.




         1 Why choose this syllabus?

         Key benefits
         Cambridge IGCSE is the world’s most popular international
         qualification for 14 to 16 year olds, although it can be taken by
         students of other ages. It is tried, tested and trusted.

         Students can choose from 70 subjects in any combination – it is
         taught by over 4500 schools in over 140 countries.
                                                                                         Cambridge
         Our programmes balance a thorough knowledge and                                  learner
         understanding of a subject and help to develop the skills
         learners need for their next steps in education or employment.

         Cambridge IGCSE First Language English allows learners
         to:
         •   develop the ability to communicate clearly, accurately and
             effectively when speaking and writing
         •   learn how to use a wide range of vocabulary, and the correct grammar, spelling and punctuation
         •   develop a personal style and an awareness of the audience being addressed.

         Learners are also encouraged to read widely, both for their own enjoyment and to further their awareness of
         the ways in which English can be used. Cambridge IGCSE First Language English also develops more general
         analysis and communication skills such as inference, and the ability to order facts and present opinions
         effectively.




         School feedback: ‘The strength of Cambridge IGCSE qualifications is internationally
         recognised and has provided an international pathway for our students to continue their studies
         around the world.’
         Feedback from: Gary Tan, Head of Schools and CEO, Raffles International Group of Schools, Indonesia




Back to contents page                                                                 www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse        4
                           Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Why choose this syllabus?




         International recognition and acceptance
         Our expertise in curriculum, teaching and learning, and assessment is the basis for the recognition of our
         programmes and qualifications around the world. The combination of knowledge and skills in Cambridge
         IGCSE First Language English gives learners a solid foundation for further study. Candidates who achieve
         grades A* to C are well prepared to follow a wide range of courses including Cambridge International AS & A
         Level English Language.

         Cambridge IGCSEs are accepted and valued by leading universities and employers around the world as
         evidence of academic achievement. Many universities require a combination of Cambridge International AS & A
         Levels and Cambridge IGCSEs or equivalent to meet their entry requirements.

         UK NARIC, the national agency in the UK for the recognition and comparison of international qualifications and
         skills, has carried out an independent benchmarking study of Cambridge IGCSE and found it to be comparable
         to the standard of the reformed GCSE in the UK. This means students can be confident that their Cambridge
         IGCSE qualifications are accepted as equivalent to UK GCSEs by leading universities worldwide.

         Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/recognition




         School feedback: ‘Cambridge IGCSE is one of the most sought-after and recognised
         qualifications in the world. It is very popular in Egypt because it provides the perfect
         preparation for success at advanced level programmes.’
         Feedback from: Managing Director of British School in Egypt BSE




Back to contents page                                                              www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse         5
                                Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Why choose this syllabus?




         Supporting teachers
         We provide a wide range of resources, detailed guidance and innovative training and professional development
         so that you can give your students the best possible preparation for Cambridge IGCSE. To find out which
         resources are available for each syllabus go to our School Support Hub.

         The School Support Hub is our secure online site for Cambridge teachers where you can find the resources
         you need to deliver our programmes. You can also keep up to date with your subject and the global Cambridge
         community through our online discussion forums.

         Find out more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/support

             Support for Cambridge IGCSE

             Planning and                  Teaching and               Learning and revision       Results
             preparation                   assessment                 •   Example candidate       •   Candidate Results
             •    Next steps guides.       •   Endorsed resources.        responses.                  Service.
             •    Schemes of work.         •   Online forums.         •   Past papers and         •   Principal examiner
             •    Specimen papers.         •   Support for                mark schemes.               reports for teachers.
             •    Syllabuses.                  coursework and         •   Specimen paper          •   Results Analysis.
                                               speaking tests.            answers.
             •    Teacher guides.


         Sign up for email notifications about changes to syllabuses, including new and revised products and services at
         www.cambridgeinternational.org/syllabusupdates


         Professional development
         We support teachers through:
         •       Introductory Training – face-to-face or online
         •       Extension Training – face-to-face or online
         •       Enrichment Professional Development – face-to-face or online
         Find out more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/events

         •       Cambridge Professional Development Qualifications
         Find out more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/profdev



             Supporting exams officers
             We provide comprehensive support and guidance for all Cambridge exams officers.
             Find out more at: www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse         6
                                                      Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026.




         2 Syllabus overview

         Aims
         The aims describe the purposes of a course based on this syllabus.

         The aims are to enable students to:
         •    read a wide range of texts, fluently and with good understanding, enjoying and appreciating a variety of
              language
         •    read critically, and use knowledge gained from wide reading to inform and improve their own writing
         •    write accurately and effectively, using Standard English appropriately
         •    work with information and with ideas in language by developing skills of evaluation, analysis, use and
              inference
         •    listen to, understand, and use spoken language effectively
         •    acquire and apply a wide vocabulary, alongside a knowledge and understanding of grammatical
              terminology and linguistic conventions.



         Content overview
         Cambridge IGCSE First Language English offers candidates the opportunity to respond with understanding to
         a rich array of reading texts during the course as a whole. Candidates will use these texts to inform and inspire
         their own writing, and write in a range of text types for different purposes and audiences.

         Candidates will develop both their speaking and their listening skills, delivering a presentation, and responding
         to questions and engaging in conversations.

         Candidates are encouraged to become appreciative and critical readers, writers, speakers and listeners.




             Cambridge Assessment International Education is an education organisation and politically
             neutral. The contents of this syllabus, examination papers and associated materials do not endorse
             any political view. We endeavour to treat all aspects of the exam process neutrally.




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      7
                                    Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Syllabus overview




         Assessment overview
         All candidates take two papers. Paper 1, and one of Paper 2 or Component 3. Candidates will be eligible
         for grades A* to G. Component 4 is optional and assesses speaking and listening skills. This component is
         separately endorsed and marks will not contribute to a candidate’s overall grade.

          All candidates take:                                             and:

          Paper 1                                    2 hours               Paper 2                                 2 hours
          Reading                                       50%                Directed Writing and Composition           50%
          80 marks                                                         80 marks
          Structured and extended writing questions                        Extended writing question and a composition
          Questions will be based on three reading texts                   task
          Externally assessed                                              Externally assessed



                                                                           or:

                                                                           Component 3
                                                                           Coursework Portfolio                       50%
                                                                           80 marks
                                                                           Three extended writing assignments
                                                                           Internally assessed and externally moderated


         Centres may also choose to enter candidates for the Speaking and Listening Test. Marks for this optional
         component do not contribute to the overall grade candidates receive for the written components. Instead,
         where candidates perform to an appropriate standard, certificates record achievement of grades 1 (high) to
         5 (low).

          Candidates can also take:

          Component 4               Approx. 10–12 minutes
          Speaking and Listening Test
          40 marks                     Separately endorsed
          Individual Talk and Conversation
          Internally assessed and externally moderated


         Information on availability is in the Before you start section.

         Check the timetable at www.cambridgeinternational.org/timetables for the test date window for
         Component 4.

         Check the samples database at www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples for submission information,
         forms and deadlines for Components 3 and 4.




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     8
                                    Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Syllabus overview




         Assessment objectives
         The assessment objectives (AOs) are:


         AO1 Reading
         Candidates will be assessed on their ability to:
         R1   demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2   demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R3   analyse, evaluate and develop facts, ideas and opinions, using appropriate support from the text
         R4   demonstrate understanding of how writers achieve effects and influence readers
         R5   select and use information for specific purposes.


         AO2 Writing
         Candidates will be assessed on their ability to:
         W1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context
         W4 use register appropriate to context
         W5 make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar.


         AO3 Speaking and Listening
         Candidates will be assessed on their ability to:
         SL1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         SL2 present facts, ideas and opinions in a cohesive order which sustains the audience’s interest
         SL3 communicate clearly and purposefully using fluent language
         SL4 use register appropriate to context
         SL5 listen and respond appropriately in conversation.




Back to contents page                                                               www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse         9
                                  Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Syllabus overview




         Weighting for assessment objectives
         The approximate weightings allocated to each of the assessment objectives (AOs) are summarised below.


         Assessment objectives as a percentage of the qualification
          Assessment objective                           Weighting in IGCSE %

          AO1 Reading                                              50

          AO2 Writing                                              50

          AO3 Speaking and listening                      Separately endorsed

          Total                                                    100


         Assessment objectives as a percentage of each component
          Assessment objective                                 Weighting in components %

                                                Paper 1                  Paper 2 and              Component 4
                                                                         Component 3

          AO1 Reading                              80                         20                         0

          AO2 Writing                              20                         80                         0

          AO3 Speaking and listening                0                          0                        100

          Total                                    100                       100                        100




Back to contents page                                                              www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      10
                                                       Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026.




         3 Subject content

         This syllabus gives you the flexibility to design a course that will interest, challenge and engage your learners.
         Where appropriate you are responsible for selecting suitable subject contexts, resources and examples to
         support your learners’ study. These should be appropriate for the learners’ age, cultural background and
         learning context as well as complying with your school policies and local legal requirements.

         The skills covered in the syllabus are outlined below.

          Reading

          •   Demonstrate understanding of written texts, and of the words and phrases within them
          •   Summarise and use material for a specific context
          •   Develop, analyse and evaluate facts, ideas and opinions
          •   Demonstrate understanding of how writers achieve their effects and influence readers
          •   Select appropriate information for specific purposes
          •   Recognise and respond to linguistic devices, figurative language and imagery.

          In developing reading skills, candidates should engage with a range of genres and text types from the
          twentieth and/or twenty-first centuries, including literature, fiction and non-fiction, and other forms of writing,
          such as discursive essays, reviews and articles. This study should include focus on writers’ use of language
          and style and the ways in which writers achieve effects and influence readers. Candidates should study how
          influence may include fact, ideas, perspectives, opinions and bias.



          Writing

          •   Express what is thought, felt and imagined
          •   Organise and convey facts, ideas and opinions effectively
          •   Demonstrate a varied vocabulary appropriate to the context
          •   Demonstrate an effective use of sentence structures
          •   Demonstrate an understanding of audience, purpose and form
          •   Demonstrate accuracy in spelling, punctuation and grammar.

          As developing writers themselves, candidates should be introduced to a range of writing skills, including
          the ability to create and compose texts with a variety of forms and purposes, e.g. descriptive, narrative,
          discursive, argumentative and persuasive. This study should include focus on the following text types: letter,
          report, article, journal, speech, interview and summary.




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse    11
                                     Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Subject content




          Speaking and Listening

          •   Describe and reflect on experience, and express what is thought, felt and imagined
          •   Organise and convey facts, ideas and opinions effectively
          •   Understand and convey complex ideas
          •   Communicate with clarity, focus and purpose
          •   Communicate appropriately for the context
          •   Engage appropriately in conversation.

          Candidates should explore a range of speaking and listening skills, including the ability to participate in
          engaging conversations and to respond spontaneously to questions and prompts. This study should include
          focus on presentation skills in employing and organising content, and language devices, such as irony, tone
          and emphasis.




Back to contents page                                                              www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse       12
                                                      Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026.




         4 Details of the assessment

         Paper 1 Reading
         Written paper, 2 hours, 80 marks

         Candidates answer three compulsory questions on three texts which may be on a similar topic. Candidates
         write all their answers in the space provided on the question paper.

         Text A and Text B will be 700–750 words in length and Text C will be 500–650 words in length. Candidates
         should spend approximately 15 minutes reading the texts.

         The texts will be printed on the question paper insert.

         Dictionaries may not be used.


         Question 1 Comprehension and summary task (30 marks)
         Comprehension task: this question requires candidates to respond to Text A.

         Candidates respond to a series of sub-questions. These include short answers testing understanding of both
         explicit and implicit meanings.

         This question tests the following reading assessment objectives (15 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R5 select and use information for specific purposes.

         Summary task: this question requires candidates to respond to Text B.

         Candidates answer a selective summary task in their own words. Candidates write their summary as
         continuous writing of no more than 120 words.

         This question tests the following reading assessment objectives (10 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R5 select and use information for specific purposes.

         This question also tests the following writing assessment objectives (5 marks):
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context.




Back to contents page                                                                www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      13
                            Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Question 2 Short-answer questions and language task (25 marks)
         Short-answer questions: this question requires candidates to respond to Text C.

         Candidates respond to a series of sub-questions which require answers of different lengths.

         This question tests the following reading assessment objectives (10 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R4 demonstrate understanding of how writers achieve effects and influence readers.

         Language task: this question requires candidates to respond to Text C.

         Candidates write about 200–300 words.

         This question tests the following reading assessment objectives (15 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R4 demonstrate understanding of how writers achieve effects and influence readers.


         Question 3 Extended response to reading (25 marks)
         This question requires candidates to respond to Text C.

         Candidates write about 250–350 words, responding in one of the following text types: letter, report, journal,
         speech, interview and article.

         This question tests the following reading assessment objectives (15 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R3 analyse, evaluate and develop facts, ideas and opinions, using appropriate support from the text.

         This question also tests the following writing assessment objectives (10 marks):
         W1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context
         W4 use register appropriate to context.




Back to contents page                                                                www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      14
                             Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Paper 2 Directed Writing and Composition
         Written paper, 2 hours, 80 marks

         Candidates answer two questions, one from each section.

         The texts will be printed on the question paper insert.

         Dictionaries may not be used.


         Section A Directed Writing (40 marks)
         Candidates answer one compulsory question on one or two texts totalling 650–750 words in length.

         Candidates use, develop and evaluate the information in the text(s) to create a discursive/argumentative/
         persuasive speech, letter or article.

         Candidates write about 250–350 words.

         This question tests the following writing assessment objectives (25 marks):
         W1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context
         W4 use register appropriate to context
         W5 make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar.

         This question also tests the following reading assessment objectives (15 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R3 analyse, evaluate and develop facts, ideas and opinions, using appropriate support from the text
         R5 select and use information for specific purposes.


         Section B Composition (40 marks)
         Candidates answer one question from a choice of four titles: two descriptive and two narrative.

         Candidates use the title to develop and write a composition.

         Candidates write about 350–450 words.

         This question tests the following writing assessment objectives (40 marks):
         W1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context
         W4 use register appropriate to context
         W5 make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar.




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     15
                            Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Component 3 Coursework Portfolio
         Written assignments, 80 marks

         This information should be read in conjunction with the relevant sections of the Cambridge Handbook for the
         relevant year of assessment.

         The forms required for the conduct and assessment of the portfolio may be downloaded from
         www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples

         Candidates submit a portfolio of three assignments, each of about 500–800 words. The assignments may be
         completed in any order, and are:

         Assignment 1: writing to discuss, argue and/or persuade in response to a text or texts
         Assignment 2: writing to describe
         Assignment 3: writing to narrate.

         The Coursework Portfolio tests the following writing assessment objectives (65 marks):
         W1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         W2 organise and structure ideas and opinions for deliberate effect
         W3 use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures appropriate to context
         W4 use register appropriate to context
         W5 make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar.

         For Assignment 1 only, the following reading assessment objectives are tested (15 marks):
         R1 demonstrate understanding of explicit meanings
         R2 demonstrate understanding of implicit meanings and attitudes
         R3 analyse, evaluate and develop facts, ideas and opinions, using appropriate support from the text
         R5 select and use information for specific purposes.

         Work may be handwritten or word-processed.

         Dictionaries may be used.

         Candidates must include the first draft of one of the three assignments submitted. The first draft will not
         contribute to the final internally assessed mark or to the externally moderated mark for the portfolio.

         The Coursework Portfolio must also include the text(s) used for Assignment 1.




Back to contents page                                                                 www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     16
                            Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Internal moderation
         If more than one teacher in your centre is marking internal assessments, you must make arrangements
         to moderate or standardise your teachers’ marking so that all candidates are assessed to a common
         standard. (If only one teacher is marking internal assessments, no internal moderation is necessary.)
         You can find further information on the process of internal moderation on the samples database
         at www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples

         You should record the internally moderated marks for all candidates on the Coursework Assessment
         Summary Form and submit these marks to Cambridge International according to the instructions set out in the
         Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year of assessment.


         External moderation
         Cambridge International will externally moderate all internally assessed components.

         •   You must submit the marks of all candidates to Cambridge International.
         •   You must also submit the marked work of a sample of candidates to Cambridge International.

         The sample you submit to Cambridge International should ideally include examples of the marking of each
         teacher. The samples database at www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples explains how the sample will
         be selected.

         The samples database at www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples also provides details of how to submit
         the marks and work.

         External moderators will produce a short report for each centre with feedback on your marking and
         administration of the assessment.




Back to contents page                                                               www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse       17
                             Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Additional information for Component 3 Coursework Portfolio
         Please read this information in conjunction with the relevant sections of the Cambridge Handbook for the
         relevant year of assessment.


         Assignments: general issues
         •   Assignments should arise from the programme of study undertaken by the teaching group.
         •   The best assignments are usually those that come from a shared learning experience but are finally chosen
             by individual candidates; negotiation of assignments with the teacher is recommended.
         •   All tasks set should be sufficiently challenging to stretch candidates to their full potential. For example, a
             class might study types of short story and their structures and conventions before individual candidates
             choose their own titles and write their own short stories for Assignment 3.
         •   Questions from past examination papers should not be used for coursework.
         •   Candidates are not expected to work under timed conditions.
         •   Assignments 1–3 may be completed in any sequence during the course. It is generally better that
             candidates complete more than three assignments during the course from which a suitable choice can
             eventually be made for the final portfolio.
         •   The assignments must clearly demonstrate different writing intentions and styles to the reader.

         Assignment 1
         •   Assignment 1 is a piece of directed writing in response to a text or texts chosen by the teacher (or by the
             candidate, with the teacher’s approval).
         •   This assignment is assessed for both writing and reading skills.
         •   Centres are advised to select text(s) of approximately two sides of A4 in total. Text(s) may consist of facts,
             opinions and/or arguments which can be selected, analysed and evaluated by the candidate and can be
             integrated into their own views.
         •   Note that literature texts are not usually suitable for this assignment.
         •   Text(s) may be of local, national or global interest – or all three – and should be suitable for the ability range
             of the candidates. They may be drawn from a variety of sources, e.g. newspapers, magazine articles, travel
             writing, text-based websites and media.
         •   Note that text(s) that are mainly informative or that provide content which has no development/discussion
             should not be set.
         •   Candidates should be able to give an overview of the argument as a whole and illustrate their
             understanding by commenting on specific ideas presented by the author of the text. This should include
             an explanation of any ideas of interest and an argument for or against them, as well as examining them for
             inconsistencies and substituting complementary or opposing views (e.g. recognise and comment on bias).
         •   The assignment may be written in any appropriate form, e.g. an article, a letter, or the words of a speech.
         •   A copy of all texts used for Assignment 1 must be included with the sample of portfolios sent to the
             external moderator.




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      18
                               Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Assignment 1                       Two examples:
         Discuss/argue and/or
                                            •   You are a local resident and feel very strongly about the ideas
         persuade in response to
                                                suggested in your local newspaper. Write a response to the editor
         text(s)
                                                in which you argue for or against the proposed ideas.
                                                In your discussion you will need to evaluate the ideas and opinions
                                                presented in the text and centre your arguments around what is said.
                                                Text: a letter or article from a local newspaper arguing in favour of or
                                                against a controversial local issue. For example: plans to make changes
                                                to the local transport system, proposals to build a community building on
                                                public land or a plan to address the behaviour of young people in the area.
                                                Note to teachers: responses could be in any appropriate form, e.g. a letter
                                                or an article.

                                            •   You have read the transcript of a speech by a well-known person
                                                about an important topical issue. Write a response to that person
                                                in which you try to persuade them to change their minds about
                                                what they have said.
                                                In your discussion you will need to evaluate the ideas and opinions
                                                presented in the speech and centre your arguments around what they
                                                have said.
                                                Text: a speech about a current topical, local or global issue. For example:
                                                a teacher’s speech about space travel, a celebrity’s speech about an
                                                environmental issue, or a doctor’s speech about medicine.
                                                Note to teachers: responses could be in any appropriate form, e.g. a
                                                speech or a letter.

         Assignment 2
         •   Assignment 2 is a piece of descriptive writing which is assessed for writing skills only.
         •   Candidates may submit poetry for Assignment 2, but this must be accompanied by some form of
             commentary by the candidate, e.g. about how the poem(s) came to be written. The commentary will be
             included in the word count.
         •   The candidate should develop ideas and images which create a convincing, well-defined picture, with
             varieties of focus.
         Assignment 2                       Two examples:
         Writing to describe
                                            •   You are in a busy place waiting for a friend who is late. Describe
                                                your surroundings and your thoughts and feelings as you wait.
                                                Note to teachers: a busy place can be any place which provides a definite
                                                sense of place/atmosphere and will contain a range of sights, sounds and/
                                                or characters for candidates to describe, e.g. cafes, train or bus stations,
                                                airport arrival or departure areas, sports stadiums, beaches and markets.
                                            •   Describe an important gathering or celebration.
                                                Note to teachers: candidates should be encouraged to choose a
                                                celebration or gathering of which they have personal experience.
                                                Appropriate occasions could be any event which provides a definite
                                                sense of place/atmosphere and will contain a range of sights, sounds
                                                and/or characters for candidates to describe, e.g. weddings, significant
                                                anniversaries or birthdays.




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse       19
                              Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Assignment 3
         •   Assignment 3 is a piece of narrative writing which is assessed for writing skills only.
         •   Candidates may write in any form.
         •   The candidate should ensure the plot is well defined and developed with features of fiction writing, such as
             description, characterisation and convincing details.
         Assignment 3                      Two examples:
         Writing to narrate
                                           •   Write a narrative piece in which the following words appear ‘and
                                               then they finally realised that it didn’t really matter anymore’.
                                               Note to teachers: the words may appear in any part of the narrative writing.
                                               Candidates may write in a range of appropriate narrative forms, e.g. the
                                               opening or closing chapter of a novel or a short story.

                                           •   Write a fictional or autobiographical account of an important or
                                               life-changing event.
                                               Note to teachers: candidates may write in a range of appropriate narrative
                                               forms and perspectives, e.g. a short story or several diary entries.

         Marking of work should be positive, rewarding achievement where possible, but clearly differentiating across
         the whole range of marks, where appropriate.

         The marker should look at the work and then make a judgement about which level statement is the best fit.
         In practice, work does not always match one level statement precisely so a judgement may need to be made
         between two or more level statements.

         Once a best-fit level statement has been identified, use the following guidance to decide on a specific mark:
         •   If the candidate’s work convincingly meets the level statement, award the highest mark.
         •   If the candidate’s work adequately meets the level statement, award the most appropriate mark in the
             middle of the range (where middle marks are available).
         •   If the candidate’s work just meets the level statement, award the lowest mark.




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      20
                              Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Table A: Level descriptions for writing in Assignment 1 (15 marks)
           Level    Marks                                                 Description

             6      13–15      •   Highly effective style capable of conveying subtle meaning. (W1)
                               •   Carefully structured for benefit of the reader. (W2)
                               •   Wide range of sophisticated vocabulary, precisely used. (W3)
                               •   Highly effective register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar almost always accurate. (W5)

             5      10–12      •   Effective style. (W1)
                               •   Secure overall structure, organised to help the reader. (W2)
                               •   Wide range of vocabulary, used with some precision. (W3)
                               •   Effective register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar mostly accurate, with occasional minor errors.
                                   (W5)

             4          7–9    •   Sometimes effective style. (W1)
                               •   Ideas generally well sequenced. (W2)
                               •   Range of vocabulary is adequate and sometimes effective. (W3)
                               •   Sometimes effective register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar generally accurate though with some errors.
                                   (W5)

             3          5–6    •   Inconsistent style, expression sometimes awkward but meaning clear. (W1)
                               •   Relies on the sequence of the original text. (W2)
                               •    Vocabulary is simple, limited in range or reliant on the original text. (W3)
                               •   Some awareness of an appropriate register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Frequent errors of spelling, punctuation and grammar, sometimes serious. (W5)

             2          3–4    •   Limited style. (W1)
                               •   Response is not well sequenced. (W2)
                               •   Limited vocabulary or words/phrases copied from the original text. (W3)
                               •   Limited awareness of appropriate register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Persistent errors of spelling, punctuation and grammar. (W5)

             1          1–2    •   Expression unclear. (W1)
                               •   Poor sequencing of ideas. (W2)
                               •   Very limited vocabulary or copying from the original text. (W3)
                               •   Very limited awareness of appropriate register for audience and purpose. (W4)
                               •   Persistent errors in spelling, punctuation and grammar impede communication. (W5)

             0           0     •   No creditable content.




Back to contents page                                                                      www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse   21
                              Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Table B: Level descriptions for reading in Assignment 1 (15 marks)
           Level    Marks                                              Description

             6      13–15      •   Successfully evaluates ideas and opinions, both explicit and implicit.
                                   (R1, R2, R3)
                               •   Assimilates ideas from the text to give a developed, sophisticated response. (R3, R5)

             5      10–12      •   Some successful evaluation of ideas and opinions, both explicit and implicit. (R1, R2,
                                   R3)
                               •   A thorough response, supported by a detailed selection of relevant ideas from the
                                   text. (R3, R5)

             4          7–9    •   Begins to evaluate mainly explicit ideas and opinions. (R1, R2, R3)
                               •   An appropriate response that includes relevant ideas from the text. (R3, R5)

             3          5–6    •   Selects and comments on explicit ideas and opinions. (R1, R2, R3)
                               •   Makes a general response including a few relevant ideas from the text.
                                   (R3, R5)

             2          3–4    •   Identifies explicit ideas and opinions. (R1, R2, R3)
                               •   Makes a limited response with little evidence from the text. (R3, R5)

             1          1–2    •   Very limited response with minimal relation to the text. (R1, R2, R3, R5)

             0           0     •   No creditable content.




Back to contents page                                                                     www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse   22
                               Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Table C: Level descriptions for composition: content and structure in Assignments 2
         and 3 (10 marks each)
          Level     Marks          General and specific marking criteria

                                                                             General
             6          9–10   •     Content is complex, engaging and effective. (W1)
                               •     Structure is secure, well balanced and carefully managed for deliberate effect. (W2)
                                          Specific – descriptive                               Specific – narrative
                               Many well-defined and developed ideas              The plot is well-defined and strongly
                               and images create a convincing overall             developed with features of fiction writing such
                               picture with varieties of focus.                   as description, characterisation and effective
                                                                                  climax, and convincing details.

                                                                             General
             5          7–8    •     Content is developed, engaging and effective. (W1)
                               •     Structure is well managed, with some choices made for deliberate effect. (W2)
                                         Specific – descriptive                                 Specific – narrative
                               Frequent, well-chosen images and details           The plot is defined and developed with
                               give a mostly convincing picture.                  features of fiction writing such as description,
                                                                                  characterisation, climax and details.
                                                                             General
             4          5–6    •     Content is relevant with some development. (W1)
                               •     Structure is competently managed. (W2)
                                           Specific – descriptive                               Specific – narrative
                               A selection of relevant ideas, images and          The plot is relevant and cohesive, with some
                               details, even where there is a tendency to         features such as characterisation and setting
                               write in a narrative style.                        of scene.
                                                                             General
             3          3–4    •     Content is straightforward and briefly developed. (W1)
                               •     Structure is mostly organised but may not always be effective. (W2)
                                          Specific – descriptive                                Specific – narrative
                               The task is addressed with a series of             The plot is straightforward, with limited use of
                               relevant but straightforward details,              the features of narrative writing.
                               which may be more typical of a narrative.
                                                                             General
             2           2     •     Content is simple, and ideas and events may be limited. (W1)
                               •     Structure is partially organised but limited in its effect. (W2)
                                          Specific – descriptive                                Specific – narrative
                               The recording of some relevant events              The plot is a simple narrative that may consist
                               with limited detail.                               of events that are only partially linked and/or
                                                                                  which are presented with partial clarity.
                                                                             General
             1           1     •     Content is occasionally relevant or clear. (W1)
                               •     Structure is limited and ineffective. (W2)
                                         Specific – descriptive                         Specific – narrative
                               The description is unclear and lacks detail. The plot and/or narrative lacks coherence.
             0           0     No creditable content.


Back to contents page                                                                       www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     23
                              Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Table D: Level descriptions for composition: style and accuracy in Assignments 2
         and 3 (15 marks each)
           Level    Marks                                             Description

             6      13–15      •   Precise, well-chosen vocabulary and varied sentence structures, chosen for effect.
                                   (W3)
                               •   Consistent well-chosen register suitable for the context. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar almost always accurate. (W5)

             5      10–12      •   Mostly precise vocabulary and a range of sentence structures mostly used for effect.
                                   (W3)
                               •   Mostly consistent appropriate register suitable for the context. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar mostly accurate, with occasional minor errors.
                                   (W5)

             4          7–9    •   Some precise vocabulary and a range of sentence structures sometimes used for
                                   effect. (W3)
                               •   Some appropriate register for the context. (W4)
                               •   Spelling, punctuation and grammar generally accurate, but with some errors. (W5)

             3          5–6    •   Simple vocabulary and a range of straightforward sentence structures. (W3)
                               •   Simple register with a general awareness of the context. (W4)
                               •   Frequent errors of spelling, punctuation and grammar, occasionally serious. (W5)

             2          3–4    •   Limited and/or imprecise vocabulary and sentence structures. (W3)
                               •   Limited and/or imprecise register for the context. (W4)
                               •   Persistent errors of spelling, punctuation and grammar. (W5)

             1          1–2    •   Frequently imprecise vocabulary and sentence structures. (W3)
                               •   Register demonstrates little or no sense of the context. (W4)
                               •   Persistent errors of spelling, punctuation and grammar impair communication. (W5)

             0           0     •   No creditable content.




Back to contents page                                                                 www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse       24
                             Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Component 4 Speaking and Listening Test
         Individual Talk and Conversation, approximately 10–12 minutes in total, 40 marks

         This component is separately endorsed with grades of 1 (high) to 5 (low). Marks for Component 4 do not
         contribute to a candidate’s overall grade.

         Teachers must treat this component as a non-coursework speaking test and must read this information in
         conjunction with the relevant sections of the Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year of assessment.

         There are two parts to the Speaking and Listening Test. In Part 1, candidates present an individual talk. In Part 2,
         candidates engage in a conversation with the teacher/examiner on their chosen topic.

         There is no question paper for the test. The test must be taken within the Speaking and Listening Test window.
         You should record all candidates. Candidates must only take the Speaking and Listening Test once and both
         parts of the test must be recorded as one.


         Part 1 Individual Talk (3–4 minutes) (20 marks)
         The candidate talks for about 3–4 minutes on a single topic or theme which they have selected before the test.
         The candidate talks about a topic of particular interest, for example, about the candidate’s reactions to meeting
         a famous person or about a recent film, which would include suggestions as to why others would also like it.

         Candidates need to show that they are able to prepare and organise material, are aware of audience, and can
         select and employ a range of language devices. Candidates are encouraged to make presentations which are
         lively, by perhaps incorporating more creative presentational styles, such as taking up a ‘voice’ or presenting a
         dramatic monologue.

         There is no question paper and each candidate chooses their own subject with guidance from their teacher.
         Teachers should advise on the suitability of topics or themes, but must not be involved in the preparation of
         material for the Individual Talk. The interaction is between the candidate and the teacher only, although the
         class may be present as an audience.

         Candidates may bring one ‘cue card’ (about postcard size) into the examination room, to remind them of the
         main points they wish to make. The cue card should contain a list of key points, not continuous sentences.
         Candidates may write their points on one side of the cue card only. Candidates may also use a limited quantity
         of illustrative material, which may include maps, diagrams, statistics and pictures. Reading from, or reliance on,
         a script or extended notes is not allowed. Recitation of a memorised script is unlikely to be successful. The cue
         card and illustrative material must be retained by centres until six months after publication of results. The cue
         card and illustrative material must be labelled with the candidate’s name and number.

         The talk should be continuous. If absolutely necessary the teacher/examiner may prompt a candidate who is
         finding it difficult to continue within the advised time of 3–4 minutes. Teachers/examiners should interrupt to ask
         questions, and begin Part 2, if the candidate shows no sign of finishing after 4½ minutes.

         Dictionaries may be used to prepare the Individual Talk, but they may not be taken into the test.

         This part of the test is to be assessed using the level descriptions in Table A on page 25.

         The Individual Talk tests the following speaking and listening assessment objectives (20 marks):
         SL1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         SL2 present facts, ideas and opinions in a cohesive order which sustains the audience’s interest
         SL3 communicate clearly and purposefully using fluent language
         SL4 use register appropriate to context.



Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     25
                             Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Part 2 Conversation (7–8 minutes) (20 marks)
         The Individual Talk leads into a conversation with the teacher/examiner about the candidate’s chosen topic. For
         example, an account of meeting a famous person could be developed into a discussion of wider issues such
         as the nature and role of ‘celebrity’ and media intrusion; a talk about a film could be developed into discussion
         of wider issues such as censorship, popular culture and the film industry.

         Candidates should be encouraged to consider how a conversation might develop around their chosen topic; if
         they cannot think of six questions they could be asked, the topic is unlikely to be easy to discuss.

         During the Individual Talk, teachers/examiners are likely to make notes in order to help them ask appropriate
         questions.

         Candidates must be prepared to supply additional factual material where appropriate and to express and
         defend a point of view. In order to give the candidate every opportunity, questions should be open, such as
         ‘tell me more about...’, ‘why?’ and ‘how?’, rather than closed questions which may be answered by ‘yes/no’.
         Candidates should not be made to feel embarrassed about expressing viewpoints that are not those of the
         teacher/examiner. The teacher/examiner may wish to ask questions about those views, but these questions
         must not be judgemental.

         The teacher/examiner should normally allow 7–8 minutes for each candidate. If a candidate ‘dries up’ after a
         few minutes, teachers/examiners should be ready to explore another aspect of the topic or theme; they should
         keep trying to make conversation so that the candidate is given every opportunity to demonstrate their ability.
         Questions should be rephrased (rather than repeated) in an attempt to continue the dialogue.

         Teachers/examiners should beware of talking too much and of candidates being given credit for what the
         teacher/examiner has actually said. Candidates are responsible for showing that they can converse adequately;
         at the same time the teacher/examiner must make sure the candidate is given every opportunity to converse by
         following up any opening given.

         Dictionaries may not be used in the test.

         This part of the test is to be assessed using the level descriptions in Table B on pages 26 and 27.

         The Conversation tests the following speaking and listening assessment objectives (20 marks):
         SL1 articulate experience and express what is thought, felt and imagined
         SL2 present facts, ideas and opinions in a cohesive order which sustains the audience’s interest
         SL3 communicate clearly and purposefully using fluent language
         SL4 use register appropriate to context
         SL5 listen and respond appropriately in conversation.


         Marking instructions
         The teacher must mark each candidate’s test out of a total of 40, in line with the level descriptions. The total
         mark for the test is divided into 20 marks for Speaking in Part 1 (Individual Talk), and 10 marks for Speaking
         and 10 marks for Listening in Part 2 (Conversation).

         For information, dates and methods of submission of the Speaking and Listening Test marks and sample,
         please refer to the Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year of assessment and the samples database at
         www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     26
                               Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Marking: general principles
         Marking of the Speaking and Listening Test should be positive, rewarding achievement where possible, but
         clearly differentiating across the whole range of marks, where appropriate.

         The marker should look at the work and then make a judgement about which level statement is the best fit.
         In practice, work does not always match one level statement precisely so a judgement may need to be made
         between two or more level statements.

         Once a best-fit level statement has been identified, use the following guidance to decide on a specific mark:
         •    If the candidate’s work convincingly meets the level statement, award the highest mark.
         •    If the candidate’s work adequately meets the level statement, award the most appropriate mark in the
              middle of the range (where middle marks are available).
         •    If the candidate’s work just meets the level statement, award the lowest mark.


         Table A: Level descriptions for Component 4, Part 1 – Individual Talk (20 marks)
             Level   Marks                                              Description

              5      17–20      •   Full and well-organised use of content.
                                •   Lively delivery which fully engages the audience.
                                •   Employs a wide range of language devices (e.g. tone, irony, emphasis) accurately
                                    and sometimes eloquently.
                                •   Sustained, appropriate and accurate use of language throughout.

              4      13–16      •   Sound use of content.
                                •   Delivery may occasionally be stilted but often attempts to engage the audience.
                                •   Employs a good range of language devices (e.g. tone, irony, emphasis) soundly.
                                •   Mainly appropriate and accurate use of language.

              3         9–12    •   Adequate use of content.
                                •   Delivery is secure but at times unimaginative, with some attempt to engage the
                                    audience.
                                •   Language devices (e.g. tone, irony, emphasis) are used safely and appropriately.
                                •   Appropriate and accurate use of language demonstrated but some inaccuracy may be
                                    present.

              2         5–8     •   Content is thin or perhaps inconsistently used.
                                •   Delivery is not secure, with little attempt to engage the audience.
                                •   Limited employment of language devices (e.g. tone, irony, emphasis) with some
                                    inaccuracy.
                                •   Some appropriate use of language but with some inaccuracy.

              1         1–4     •   Content is mostly undeveloped and/or very thin.
                                •   Delivery is weak, with no attempt to engage the audience.
                                •   Not able to use language devices (e.g. tone, irony, emphasis) or devices used with
                                    serious error.
                                •   Language is not used appropriately, or is used with serious inaccuracy.

              0          0      •   Does not meet the above criteria.




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      27
                            Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Table B: Level descriptions for Component 4, Part 2 – Conversation (20 marks)
         For Part 2, record separate marks for speaking and for listening.

          Speaking                                                     Listening
          Level    Marks                Description                    Level   Marks              Description
            5       9–10    •   Extends the subject matter               5     9–10    •   A natural and fluent
                                and elicits responses from                                 conversation.
                                the listener; speaks on equal                          •   Responds fully to questions
                                terms with the listener.                                   and develops prompts; deals
                            •   Employs a wide range of                                    confidently and sometimes
                                language devices (e.g. tone,                               enthusiastically with alterations
                                irony, emphasis) accurately                                in the direction of the
                                and sometimes eloquently;                                  conversation.
                                sustained, appropriate and
                                accurate use of language
                                throughout.
            4       7–8     •   Subject matter is organised              4      7–8    •   The conversation is
                                and expressed competently;                                 occasionally fluent and
                                attempts to speak on equal                                 sometimes shaped by the
                                terms with the listener but with                           candidate.
                                a varying degree of success.                           •   Consistently responds
                            •   Employs a good range of                                    appropriately and in extended
                                language devices (e.g. tone,                               detail to questions and
                                irony, emphasis) soundly;                                  prompts; deals appropriately
                                mainly appropriate and                                     with most of the changes
                                accurate use of language.                                  in the direction of the
                                                                                           conversation.
            3       5–6     •   Deals with the subject matter            3      5–6    •   The conversation is maintained
                                adequately; the listener is                                through the candidate’s
                                generally but not always                                   responses.
                                prominent.                                             •   Responds to questions
                            •   Language devices (e.g. tone,                               adequately but deals less
                                irony, emphasis) are used                                  effectively with prompts;
                                appropriately; appropriate                                 changes in the direction of the
                                and accurate use of language                               conversation are occasionally
                                demonstrated, but some                                     dealt with.
                                inaccuracy may be present.
            2       3–4     •   There is evidence of some                2      3–4    •   The conversation is driven by
                                linking together of ideas                                  the listener’s questions.
                                relating to the subject matter                         •   The candidate provides limited
                                but it is inconsistent; accepts                            response to the questions and
                                that the listener is in full control                       struggles to develop prompts;
                                of the conversation.                                       tends to maintain the direction
                            •   Limited use of language                                    of the conversation.
                                devices (e.g. tone, irony,
                                emphasis) with some
                                inaccuracy; some appropriate
                                use of language but with some
                                inaccuracy.




Back to contents page                                                                  www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse    28
                            Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




          Speaking                                                Listening
          Level   Marks                Description                Level    Marks               Description
            1       1–2     •   Simple facts and ideas are          1       1–2     •   A two-way conversation is not
                                expressed with generally                                successfully maintained.
                                unsuccessful attempts at                            •   The candidate responds
                                organisation; barely capable                            simply or is unable to respond
                                of engaging in a two-way                                to questions or prompts;
                                conversation.                                           cannot recognise changes
                            •   Not able to use language                                in the direction of the
                                devices (e.g. tone, irony,                              conversation.
                                emphasis) or devices used
                                with serious error; language
                                is not used appropriately or is
                                used with serious inaccuracy.
            0           0   •   Does not meet the above             0         0     •   Does not meet the above
                                criteria.                                               criteria.




Back to contents page                                                               www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse       29
                           Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. Details of the assessment




         Command words
         Command words and their meanings help candidates know what is expected from them in the exams. The
         table below includes command words used in the assessment for this syllabus. The use of the command word
         will relate to the subject context.

          Command word         What it means

          Describe             state the points of a topic / give characteristics and main features

          Explain              set out purposes or reasons / make the relationships between things evident / provide
                               why and/or how and support with relevant evidence

          Give                 produce an answer from a given source or recall/memory

          Identify             name/select/recognise




Back to contents page                                                               www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      30
                                                      Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026.




         5 What else you need to know

         This section is an overview of other information you need to know about this syllabus. It will help to share the
         administrative information with your exams officer so they know when you will need their support. Find more
         information about our administrative processes at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide



         Before you start
         Previous study
         We recommend that learners starting this course should have studied an English Language curriculum such as
         the Cambridge Lower Secondary programme or equivalent national educational framework.


         Guided learning hours
         We design Cambridge IGCSE syllabuses based on learners having about 130 guided learning hours for each
         subject during the course but this is for guidance only. The number of hours a learner needs to achieve the
         qualification may vary according to local practice and their previous experience of the subject.


         Availability and timetables
         All Cambridge schools are allocated to one of six administrative zones. Each zone has a specific timetable.

         You can view the timetable for your administrative zone at www.cambridgeinternational.org/timetables

         You can enter candidates in the June and November exam series. If your school is in India, you can also enter
         your candidates in the March exam series.

         Check you are using the syllabus for the year the candidate is taking the exam.

         Private candidates can enter for this syllabus. Some components are not available to private candidates. For
         more information, please refer to the Cambridge Guide to Making Entries.


         Combining with other syllabuses
         Candidates can take this syllabus alongside other Cambridge International syllabuses in a single exam series.
         The only exceptions are:
         •   Cambridge IGCSE English (as an Additional Language) (0472)
         •   Cambridge IGCSE (9–1) First Language English (0990)
         •   Cambridge IGCSE English as a Second Language (0510)
         •   Cambridge IGCSE (9–1) English as a Second Language (0993)
         •   Cambridge IGCSE English as a Second Language (count-in oral) (0511)
         •   Cambridge IGCSE (9–1) English as a Second Language (count-in oral) (0991)
         •   Cambridge O Level English Language (1123)
         •   syllabuses with the same title at the same level.

         Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge IGCSE (9–1) and Cambridge O Level syllabuses are at the same level.




Back to contents page                                                                 www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     31
                          Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. What else you need to know




         Group awards: Cambridge ICE
         Cambridge ICE (International Certificate of Education) is a group award for Cambridge IGCSE. It allows schools
         to offer a broad and balanced curriculum by recognising the achievements of learners who pass exams in a
         range of different subjects.

         Learn more about Cambridge ICE at www.cambridgeinternational.org/cambridgeice



         Making entries
         Exams officers are responsible for submitting entries to Cambridge International. We encourage them to work
         closely with you to make sure they enter the right number of candidates for the right combination of syllabus
         components. Entry option codes and instructions for submitting entries are in the Cambridge Guide to Making
         Entries. Your exams officer has a copy of this guide.


         Exam administration
         To keep our exams secure, we produce question papers for different areas of the world, known as
         administrative zones. We allocate all Cambridge schools to one administrative zone determined by their
         location. Each zone has a specific timetable. Some of our syllabuses offer candidates different assessment
         options. An entry option code is used to identify the components the candidate will take relevant to the
         administrative zone and the available assessment options.


         Support for exams officers
         We know how important exams officers are to the successful running of exams. We provide them with the
         support they need to make your entries on time. Your exams officer will find this support, and guidance for all
         other phases of the Cambridge Exams Cycle, at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide


         Retakes and carry forward marks
         Candidates can retake the whole qualification as many times as they want to. Information on retake entries is at
         www.cambridgeinternational.org/entries

         Candidates cannot resubmit, in whole or in part, coursework [or speaking tests] from a previous series. To
         confirm what entry options are available to carry forward marks for this syllabus, refer to the Cambridge Guide
         to Making Entries for the relevant series. Regulations for carrying forward internally assessed marks can be
         found in the Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide


         Language
         This syllabus and the related assessment materials are available in English only.




Back to contents page                                                                www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     32
                          Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. What else you need to know




         Accessibility and equality
         Syllabus and assessment design
         Cambridge International works to avoid direct or indirect discrimination in our syllabuses and assessment
         materials. We aim to maximise inclusivity for candidates of all national, cultural or social backgrounds and with
         other protected characteristics. In addition, the language and layout used are designed to make our materials
         as accessible as possible. This gives all learners the opportunity, as fairly as possible, to demonstrate their
         knowledge, skills and understanding and helps to minimise the requirement to make reasonable adjustments
         during the assessment process.


         Access arrangements
         Access arrangements (including modified papers) are the principal way in which Cambridge International
         complies with our duty, as guided by the UK Equality Act (2010), to make ‘reasonable adjustments’ for
         candidates with special educational needs (SEN), disability, illness or injury. Where a candidate would otherwise
         be at a substantial disadvantage in comparison to a candidate with no SEN, disability, illness or injury, we
         may be able to agree pre-examination access arrangements. These arrangements help a candidate by
         minimising accessibility barriers and maximising their opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge, skills and
         understanding in an assessment.


         Important:
         •   Requested access arrangements should be based on evidence of the candidate’s barrier to assessment
             and should also reflect their normal way of working at school; this is in line with The Cambridge Handbook
             www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
         •   For Cambridge International to approve an access arrangement, we will need to agree that it constitutes
             a reasonable adjustment, involves reasonable cost and timeframe and does not affect the security and
             integrity of the assessment.
         •   Availability of access arrangements should be checked by centres at the start of the course. Details of our
             standard access arrangements and modified question papers are available in The Cambridge Handbook
             www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
         •   Please contact us at the start of the course to find out if we are able to approve an arrangement that is not
             included in the list of standard access arrangements.
         •   Candidates who cannot access parts of the assessment may be able to receive an award based on the
             parts they have completed.

         Some access arrangements are not allowed in this syllabus because they affect the assessment objective:
         •   candidates are not allowed to use voice-activated software to dictate their written work
         •   human readers are not allowed.

         If your candidate(s) will have significant difficulties accessing the components of this qualification, please
         contact info@cambridgeinternational.org before starting the course.




Back to contents page                                                                   www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse   33
                          Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. What else you need to know




         After the exam
         Grading and reporting
         Grades A*, A, B, C, D, E, F or G indicate the standard a candidate achieved at Cambridge IGCSE.

         A* is the highest and G is the lowest. ‘Ungraded’ means that the candidate’s performance did not meet the
         standard required for grade G. ‘Ungraded’ is reported on the statement of results but not on the certificate.

         In specific circumstances your candidates may see one of the following letters on their statement of results:
         •   Q (PENDING)
         • X (NO RESULT).
         These letters do not appear on the certificate.

         On the statement of results and certificates, Cambridge IGCSE is shown as INTERNATIONAL GENERAL
         CERTIFICATE OF SECONDARY EDUCATION (IGCSE).



         How students and teachers can use the grades
         Assessment at Cambridge IGCSE has two purposes:
         •   to measure learning and achievement
             The assessment:
             –   confirms achievement and performance in relation to the knowledge, understanding and skills specified
                 in the syllabus, to the levels described in the grade descriptions.
         •   to show likely future success
             The outcomes:
             –   help predict which students are well prepared for a particular course or career and/or which students
                 are more likely to be successful
             –   help students choose the most suitable course or career.



         Grade descriptions
         Grade descriptions are provided to give an indication of the standards of achievement candidates awarded
         particular grades are likely to show. Weakness in one aspect of the examination may be balanced by a better
         performance in some other aspect.

         Grade descriptions for Cambridge IGCSE First Language Engish will be published after the first assessment of
         the syllabus in 2020. Find more information at www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse




Back to contents page                                                                www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse     34
                         Cambridge IGCSE First Language English 0500 syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026. What else you need to know




         Changes to this syllabus for 2024, 2025 and 2026
         The syllabus has been updated. This is version 1, published September 2021.

         You must read the whole syllabus before planning your teaching programme.

          Changes to assessment           Paper 1 Reading:
          (including changes to
                                          •   The assessment of W5: Make accurate use of spelling, punctuation and
          specimen papers)
                                              grammar, has been removed from Paper 1 Reading only.
                                          •   W5 has been removed from Question 1f and Question 3.




          Any textbooks endorsed to support the syllabus for examination from 2020 are still suitable for
          use with this syllabus.




Back to contents page                                                              www.cambridgeinternational.org/igcse      35
School feedback: ‘While studying Cambridge IGCSE and Cambridge International A Levels, students
broaden their horizons through a global perspective and develop a lasting passion for learning.’
Feedback from: Zhai Xiaoning, Deputy Principal, The High School Affiliated to Renmin University of China




We are committed to making our documents accessible in accordance with the WCAG 2.1 Standard. We’re always looking to improve
the accessibility of our documents. If you find any problems or you think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, contact us at
info@cambridgeinternational.org with the subject heading: Digital accessibility. If you need this document in a different format,
contact us and supply your name, email address and requirements and we will respond within 15 working days.




Cambridge Assessment International Education, The Triangle Building, Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge, CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
t : +44 (0)1223 553554            email : info@cambridgeinternational.org            www.cambridgeinternational.org

© Cambridge University Press & Assessment September 2021
